 

 
 
     Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream:  it seemed that he could  hear 
his own small  vo ice  echoing in black tunnels,  calling  Frodo, Frodo!  But 
instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous  orc-faces grinned  at  him  out of the 
shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him from  every side. Where 
was 
Merry? 
     He  woke. Cold air blew on his  face. He was lying on his back. Evening  
was coming and  the sky above was growing dim. He turned and found that  the 
dream  was little worse than  the  waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were 
tied with cords.  Beside him Merry lay,  white-faced, with a  dirty rag bound  
across his brows. All about them sat or stood a great company of Orcs. 
     Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became 
separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and  Merry had run off into  the 
woods. What had come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking 
no 
notice  of  old  Strider? They  had  run a  long  way shouting--he could not 
remember how far or how long; and then suddenly they had crashed  right into 
a  group  of Orcs: they  were standing listening, and they did not appear to 
see Merry and Pippin until they were  almost in their arms. Then they yelled 
and  dozens of other goblins had sprung out  of the  trees. Merry and he had 
drawn their swords, but the  Orcs did not wish to fight, and had tried  only 
to lay  hold of them, even when Merry had cut off several  of their arms and 
hands. Good old Merry!  
     Then  Boromir  had come  leaping through  the  trees. He had made  them 
fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled.  But they had not gone far on  
the way back when they were attacked again. by a hundred Orcs at least, some 
of  them very large, and they shot  a rain of  arrows:  always  at  Boromir. 
Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang,  and at first the Orcs 
had  been dismayed and  had  drawn back; but when no  answer but the  echoes 
came, they had attacked more fierce  than ever. Pippin did not remember much 
more.  His last memo was of Boromir  leaning against a tree, plucking out an 
arrow; then darkness fell suddenly. 
     'I suppose I was knocked on the head,' he said to himself. 'I wonder if 

####-poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to  Boromir? Why  didn't the 
Orcs 
kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?' 
     He could  not  answer the questions. He felt  cold and  sick.  'I  wish 
Gandalf  had never persuaded Elrond to let  us come,' he thought. 'What good 
have I been? Just a  nuisance: a  passenger, a piece  of luggage. And now  I 
have been stolen  and I am  just  a piece of  luggage for the  Orcs.  I hope 
Strider or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope for it? Won't 
that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!' 
     He  struggled  a little, quite  uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near 
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable  tongue. 'Rest  
while  you  can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech, 
which he made almost  as hideous as  his own language.  'Rest while you can!  
We'll find  a use for your  legs before  long. You'll wish you had  got none 
before we get home.' 
     'If I had my way, you'd  wish you  were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd 
make you squeak,  you miserable rat.' He stooped over  Pippin  bringing  his 
yellow fangs close to his face.  He had  a  black  knife  with a long jagged 
blade  in  his hand.  'Lie quiet, or  I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed. 
'Don't  draw attention  to yourself,  or  I may forget my orders.  Curse the 
Isengarders! Ugl®k  u  bagronk sha  pushdug Saruman -glob  b®bhosh skai':   
he 
passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into 
muttering and snarling. 
     Terrified  Pippin lay still, though the pain at  his wrists  and ankles 
was  growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back.  To take 
his mind off himself he listened intently to all that  he could  hear. There 
were many  voices round about, and though orc-speech  sounded  at all  times 
full  of hate and anger, it  seemed plain  that something like a quarrel had 
begun, and was getting hotter. 
     To Pippin's  surpr ise he  found that much of the  talk was intelligible 
many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of 
two 
or three quite different tribes  were present, and they could not understand 
one another's orc-speech. There  was  an angry  debate concerning  what they 
were to do now: which way they were to take and what should be done with the 
prisoners. 

####-     'There's no time to kill them properly,' said one. 'No time for play on 
this trip.' 
     'That  can't  be helped,' said another. 'But why not kill  them  quick, 
kill them  now? They're  a cursed  nuisance, and we're in a hurry. Evening's 
coming on, and we ought to get a move on.' 
     'Orders.' said a third  voice in  a  deep growl. 'Kill all but  NOT the 
Halfings;  they are to be brought back ALIVE  as quickly as possible . That's 
my orders.' 
     'What are they wanted for?'  asked  several voices. 'Why alive? Do they 
give good sport?' 
     'No!  I  heard that  one of them has  got something,  something  that's 
wanted for  the  War,  some   elvish plot  or other.  Anyway they'll both  be 
questioned.' 
     'Is that all you know? Why don't  we search them and find out? We might  
find something that we could use ourselves.' 
     'That is a very interesting remark,' sneered a  voice,  softer than the 
others but more evil. 'I may have to report that. The prisoners  are  NOT to 
be searched or plundered: those are my orders.' 
     'And  mine  too,'  said  the  deep  voice. 'Alive and as  captured;  no 
spoiling. That's my orders.' 
     'Not our order s!' said one of the earlier voices. 'We have come all the 
way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. I wish to kill, and then go 
back north.' 
     'Then you can wish  again,' said the  growling voice. 'I  am  Ugl®k.  I 
command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.' 
     'Is Saruman the  master  or the Great Eye?'  said the  evil  voice. 'We 
should go back at once to Lugb®rz.' 
     'If we could cross the Great River, we might,' said another voice. 'But 
there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.' 
     'I came  across,'  said  the evil  voice.  'A winged  Nazgyl awaits  us 
northward on the east -bank.' 
     'Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get  all the 
pay and praise in Lugb®rz,  and leave  us to foot it as best we  can through 
the Horse-country.  No, we must  stick together.  These lands are dangerous:  
full of foul rebels and brigands.' 
     'Aye, we must stick together,' growled Ugl®k. 'I don't trust you little 
swine. You've no guts outside your own sties. But for us you'd all  have run 

####-away. We are the fighting  Uruk-hai! We slew the  great warrior. We took the 
prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand 
that gives us man's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here, 
and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Ugl®k. I have spoken.' 
     'You have  spoken more than enough,  Ugl®k,' sneered the evil voice. 'I  
wonder how  they would like  it  in  Lugb®rz. They might think  that Ugl®k's 
shoulders  needed relieving  of a  swollen head. They might  ask  where  his 
strange ideas came  from. Did they come  from Saruman, perhaps? Who  does 
he 
think he is, setting up on his own with his  filthy white badges? They might 
agree with me, with  Grishnbkh their trusted messenger; and I  Grishnbkh say 
this: Saruman is a fool. and a dirty treacherous fool. But the  Great Eye is 
on him. 
     'Swine  is  it? How  do  you  folk  like  being  called  swine  by  the 
muck -rakers  of  a  dirty  little  wizard?  It's  orc-flesh  they  eat, I'll 
warrant.' 
     Many loud yells  in orc-speech  answered him, and the ringing  clash of 
weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would 
happen.  His guards had gone to  join in the  fray. In the twilight he saw a  
large  black  Orc,  probably  Ugl®k,  standing  facing  Grishnbkh,  a  short 
crook -legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the 
ground. Round  them  were many smaller  goblins. Pippin supposed that  these 
were the ones from the  North. They had drawn  their knives and swords,  but 
hesitated to attack Ugl®k. 
     Ugl®k  shouted, and a  number of other Orcs of  nearly his own size ran 
up. Then suddenly, without  warning, Ugl®k sprang  forwards,  and  with  two 
swift strokes swept  the heads  off two of his opponents.  Grishnbkh stepped 
aside and  vanished  into the  shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped 
backwards  and fell  over Merry's  prostrate  form with  a  curse. Yet  that 
probably saved his life, for Ugl®k's followers leaped over him and  cut down 
another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged  guard. His 
body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife. 
     'Put up your weapons!' shouted Ugl®k. 'And let's have no more nonsense! 
We go straight west  from here, and down the stair.  From  there straight to 
the  downs, then along the  river to the forest. And we march day and night. 
That clear?' 
     'Now,' thought  Pippin,  'if  only it takes  that ugly  fellow a little 

####-while to get his  troop under control, I've got  a chance.' A gleam of  hope 
had come to him. The edge  of the black knife had snicked his arm, and  then 
slid down to his wrist.  He  felt the blood trickling on to his hand, but he 
also felt the cold touch of steel against his skin. 
     The Orcs were getting ready to march again, but some of the Northerners 
were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were 
cowed.  There  was  much  cursing  and confusion. For  the moment Pippin was 
unwatched. His legs were  securely bound, but his arms were  only tied about 
the wrists,  and his hands were  in front  of  him. He could  move them both 
together, though the bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Orc to one 
side, then hardly daring to  breathe, he drew the  knot of the wrist -cord up 
and down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand held 
it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his fingers and knotted  
it again into a loose  bracelet of two loops and slipped it  over his hands.  
Then he lay very still. 
     'Pick up those prisoners!' shouted Ugl®k.  'Don't play any  tricks with 
them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.' 
     An Orc  seized Pippin like a sack. put its head between his tied hands,  
grabbed his arms and  dragged them  down, until  Pippin's  face was  crushed 
against its neck; then it jolted off  with him. Another treated Merry in the 
same way. The Orc's clawlike hand gripped Pippin's arms like iron; the nails 
bit into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams.  
     Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night, 
but the  slim moon was already falling westward. They were on the  edge of a 
cliff that seemed to look out  over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of 
water falling nearby. 
     'The scouts have come back at last,' said an Orc close at hand. 
     'Well, what did you discover?' growled the voice of Ugl®k. 
     'Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All's clear now.' 
     'Now,  I  daresay. But how  long? You fools! You should  have shot him.  
He'll  raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning. 
Now we'll have to leg it double quick.' 
     A shadow bent over  Pippin. It  was Ugl®k. 'Sit up! ' said the  Orc. 'My 
lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down and you  must  
use your legs. Be  helpful now. No  crying out, no trying to escape. We have 
ways of paying for tricks that you won't like, though they won't spoil  your 
usefulness for the Master.' 

####-     He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him  up by his 
hair  and stood him  on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Ugl®k dragged him up 
by  his hair again. Several Orcs  laughed. Ugl®k thrust a  flask between his 
teeth and poured some burning liquid down  his  throat: he felt a hot fierce 
glow  flow through  him.  The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could 
stand. 
     'Now for  the other!' said Ugl®k.  Pippin saw him go  to Merry, who was 
lying  close  by,  and kick  him. Merry groaned.  Seizing him roughly  Ugl®k 
pulled  him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then 
he smeared the wound with some dark  stuff out of a small wooden  box. Merry 
cried out and struggled wildly. 
     The Orcs clapped and  hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,'  they  jeered. 
'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.' 
     But  at the moment Ugl®k was not engaged in  sport. He needed speed and 
had to humour  unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in orc-fashion; and 
his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down 
the  hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to  his feet, Merry 
stood up, looking pale but grim  and defiant, and very  much alive. The gash 
in his forehead gave him  no  more trouble, but he bore a  brown scar to the 
end of his days.  
     'Hullo, Pippin!' he said.  'So you've come on  this  little expedition, 
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?' 
     'Now then!' said Ugl®k.  'None of that!  Hold your tongues. No  talk to 
one another. Any  trouble will be  reported at the other end, and He'll know 
how to pay  you. You'll  get bed and breakfast  all right: more than you can 
stomach.' 
     The orc-band  began to descend a  narrow ravine  leading down into  the 
misty plain below.  Merry and  Pippin,  separated by a  dozen  Orcs or more, 
climbed down with  them. At the  bottom  they  stepped on to  grass, and the 
hearts of the hobbits rose. 
     'Now  straight on!'  shouted Ugl®k. 'West  and a  little  north. Follow 
Lugdush.' 
     'But what are we going to do at sunrise?' said some of the Northerners.  
     'Go on running,' said Ugl®k. 'What do you think? Sit  on the  grass and 
wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?' 
     'But we can't run in the sunlight.' 
     'You'll run with me  behind you,' said Ugl®k. 'Run! Or you'll never see 

####-your beloved  holes again. By  the White Hand! What's the use of sending out 
mountain-maggots  on  a trip, only half trained. Run, curse  you! Run  while 
night lasts!' 
     Then the whole  company  began to  run  with the long loping strides of 
Orcs. They kept  no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their speed 
was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was far back in the 
line. He  wondered how long he would be able to  go on at this pace: he  had 
had no food since the morning. One of  his guards had a whip. But at present 
the orc-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, too, were wide-awake. 
     Every now and again there  came  into his mind unbidden a vision of the  
keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, running behind. 
But  what  could even a Ranger see except a confused  trail of orc-feet? His 
own  little prints  and Merry's  were overwhelmed by  the  trampling of  the 
iron-shod shoes before them and behind them and about them. 
     They had  gone  only a mile  or so from the cliff when the  land sloped 
down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft and wet. Mist 
lay there, pale-glimmering in the  last rays of  the  sickle moon.  The dark 
shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up. 
     'Ai! Steady now!' shouted Ugl®k from the rear. 
     A sudden thought leaped into Pippin's mind, and he acted on it at once. 
He  swerved aside to the right, and  dived out of the reach of his clutching 
guard, headfirst into the mist; he landed sprawling on the grass.  
     'Halt!' yelled Ugl®k. 
     There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran. 
But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right in front of him. 
     'No hope  of escape!' thought Pippin. 'But there is a hope  that I have 
left  some of  my own marks unspoilt on the  wet ground.' He groped with his 
two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as 
long arms and  hard claws seized him. he  let it fall. 'There  I  suppose it 
will lie until the end of time,' he thought. 'I don't  know why I did it. If 
the others have escaped, they've probably all gone with Frodo.' 
     A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry. 
     'Enough!' shouted Ugl®k running  up. 'He's still got to run a long  way 
yet. Make 'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.' 
     'But that's not  all,' he snarled, turning to Pippin. 'I shan't forget. 
Payment is only put off. Leg it!' 
     Neither  Pippin nor Merry remembered  much  of the later  part  of  the 

####-journey. Evil  dreams and evil  waking were blended  into  a  long tunnel of 
misery,  with hope  growing ever fainter behind.  They  ran, and  they  ran, 
striving to keep up the  pace set by  the Orcs, licked  every now  and again 
with a cruel thong cunningly  handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were 
seized and dragged for some distance. 
     The  warmth  of  the orc-draught  had  gone. Pippin felt cold and  sick  
again. Suddenly  he  fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending 
nails  gripped  and lifted him. He was  carried like a  sack  once more, and 
darkness  grew about him:  whether the  darkness  of  another  night,  or  a  
blindness of his eyes, he could not tell. 
     Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that  many of the 
Orcs were demanding a halt. Ugl®k was shouting. He felt himself flung to the 
ground,  and he lay as he fell, till black dreams  took  him. But he did not 
long  escape from  pain; soon  the iron grip of  merciless hands was on  him 
again.  For  a  long  time  he was  tossed and shaken, and then  slowly  the 
darkness  gave way, and he came  back to the waking  world and found that it 
was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.  
     There  he  lay for a while, fighting  with despair. His head  swam, but 
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught.  
An Orc stooped over him, and flung him some bread  and a strip of raw  dried 
flesh. He ate  the  stale grey  bread hungrily, but  not the  meat.  He  was 
famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by an Orc, the 
flesh of he dared not guess what creature. 
     He sat up and  looked about.  Merry was not  far away. They were by  the 
banks  of a swift narrow  river.  Ahead mountains  loomed: a tall  peak  was 
catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower  
slopes before them. 
     There was much shou ting and debating among  the Orcs; a  quarrel seemed 
on  the  point  of  breaking  out again  between  the  Northerners  and  the 
Isengarders. Some  were  pointing back  away south, and  some were  pointing 
eastward. 
     'Very  well,' said Ugl®k. 'Leave them  to me then! No killing,  as I've 
told you before; but if you want to  throw away  what we've come all the way 
to get, throw it  away! I'll look after it. Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the 
work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run!  Run!  There's  the 
forest,' he  shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your  best hope.  Off 
you go!  And quick,  before I knock a few more heads off, to  put some sense 

####-into the others.' 
     There was some cursing and scuffling, and  then most of the Northe rners 
broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of  them, running wildly along the 
river towards the mountains.  The hobbits were left with the  Isengarders: a  
grim  dark  band, four score at  least of large, swart, slant-eyed Orcs with 
great bows and shor t  broad-bladed swords. A  few  of the larger and  bolder  
Northerners remained with them. 
     'Now we'll deal with  Grishnbkh,'  said Ugl®k; but some even of his own 
followers were looking uneasily southwards.  
     'I  know,' growled Ugl®k.  'The cursed horse-boys have got  wind of us. 
But  that's all your  fault,  Snaga. You and the  other scouts ought to have 
your ears cut  off. But we are the fighters. We'll feast  on horseflesh yet, 
or something better.' 
     At  that moment Pippin  saw why some  of the  troop  had been  pointing  
eastward. From  that  direction there  now came hoarse cries, and  there was 
Grishnbkh again, and  at his  back a  couple  of  score of others like  him: 
long-armed  crook -legged Orcs. They  had a red eye painted on their shields.  
Ugl®k stepped forward to meet them. 'So you've come back?' he said. 'Thought 
better of it, eh?' 
     'I've returned to  see  that  Orders are  carried out and the prisoners 
safe,' answered Grishnbkh. 
     'Indeed!'  said Ugl®k.  'Waste  of  effort.  I'll see that  orders  are 
carried out in my command. And what else did you  come back for? You went 
in 
a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?' 
     'I left a  fool,' snarled Grishnbkh. 'But there were some stout fellows 
with him that are too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them into a mess. I've 
come to help them.' 
     'Splendid!'  laughed  Ugl®k.  'But  unless  you've  got some  guts  for  
fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugb®rz was your road.  The 
Whiteskins 
are coming. What's happened to your  precious  Nazgyl?  Has  he had  another  
mount shot under him? Now, if you'd brought him along, that might have  been 
useful-if these Nazgyl are all they make out.' 
     'Nazgyl, Nazgyl,' said Grishnbkh, shivering and licking his lips, as if 
the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. 'You  speak of what is 
deep beyond the  reach of your muddy  dreams,  Ugl®k,' he said. 'Nazgyl! Ah! 

####-All that  they make  out! One day  you'll  wish that you  had not said that. 
Ape!' he snarled fiercely.  'You ought to know that they're the apple of the 
Great Eye. But the winged  Nazgyl: not  yet, not yet. He won't let them show 
themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War -and 
other purposes.' 
     'You seem  to know a lot,' said  Ugl®k. 'More   than is good for you,  I 
guess.  Perhaps those  in  Lugb®rz  might wonder how, and  why. But  in  the 
meantime the  Uruk -hai of Isengard can do the dirty  work,  as usual.  Don't  
stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging 
it to the forest. You'd better  follow.  You wouldn't get  back to the Great 
River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I'll be on your heels.' 
     The Isengarders seized Merry and  Pippin again  and slung them on their  
backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, pausing now and 
again only to sling the hobbits to fresh  carriers. Either because they were 
quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnbkh's, the Isengarders 
gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor,  and Grishnbkh's folk closed in 
behind. Soon they  were  gaining also on  the Northerners ahead.  The forest  
began to draw nearer. 
     Pippin was bruised and torn,  his aching  head was grated by the filthy 
jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in front were bowed 
backs, and tough thick legs going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if 
they were made of wire and horn,  beating out  the nightmare seconds  of  an 
endless time. 
     In  the  afternoon Ugl®k's  troop overtook the  Northerners.  They were 
flagging in the rays  of the  bright sun, winter sun shining in  a pale cool 
sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out. 
     'Maggots!' jeered the Isengarders. 'You're cooked. The Whiteskins  will 
catch you and eat you. They're coming!' 
     A cry  from Grishnbkh  showed that  this was  not mere jest.  Horsemen, 
riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still  far behind, but gaining 
on the Orcs, gaining on  them like a tide over the flats on folk straying in 
a quicksand. 
     The  Isengarders  began  to run with a redoubled  pace that  astonished 
Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed  for the end of  a race. Then he saw that 
the  sun was sinking, falling behind the  Misty Mountains;  shadows  reached 
over the land. The soldiers  of Mordor lifted their heads and  also began to 
put on  speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a  few 

####-outlying trees.  The land was beginning to slope upwards. ever more steeply; 
but the  Orcs did not halt. Both Ugl®k and Grishnbkh  shouted, spurring them 
on to a last effort. 
     'They will  make it yet. They will escape,' thought Pippin. And then he 
managed  to twist  his neck.  so  as  to  glance back with  one eye over his 
shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Orcs, 
galloping over  the plain.  The sunset gilded their spears  and helmets, and 
glinted  in  their  pale  flowing  hair.  They  were  hemming the  Orcs  in, 
preventing them  from  scattering, and  driving them along the  line of  the 
river. 
     He wondered  very much what kind of folk they were. He wished  now that 
he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps and things; but in 
those days the plans for the journey seemed to be  in  more competent hands, 
and he had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf, or from  Strider, 
and  even  from Frodo. All  that he  could remember  about  Rohan  was  that 
Gandalf's horse, Shadowfax,  had come from  that land. That sounded hopeful, 
as far as it went. 
     'But how will  they know that  we are not  Orcs?' he thought. 'I  don't  
suppose they've ever  heard  of hobbits down  here. I suppose I  ought to be 
glad that the beastly Orcs  look like being destroyed, but I would rather be 
saved  myself.' The chances were that  he and Merry wou ld be killed together 
with their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of them. 
     A few of  the riders appeared to be bowmen,  skilled at shooting from a  
running horse. Riding swiftly into  range they shot arrows at  the Orcs that 
straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the riders wheeled away out 
of the range of the answering  bows  of their  enemies, who shot wildly, not 
daring to halt. This  happened many  times, and on one  occasion arrows fell 
among  the Isengarders. One  of them, just  in front of Pippin, stumbled and  
did not get up again. 
     Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Orcs had 
fallen,  but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness the Orcs came 
to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably  no more than 
three  furlongs  away,  but  they  could go no  further.  The  horsemen  had 
encircled them. A small band  disobeyed  Ugl®k's command, and ran on 
towards 
the forest: only three returned. 
     'Well,  here  we are,' sneered Grishnbkh. 'Fine  leadership! I hope the 

####-great Ugl®k will lead us out again.' 
     'Put  those  Halflings  down!'  ordered  Ugl®k,  taking  no  notice  of 
Grishnbkh. 'You, Lugdush, get two others  and stand guard over them! They're 
not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As 
long  as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and  they're not 
to be rescued. Bind their legs!' 
     The last  part  of  the order was  carried  out mercilessly. But Pippin 
found that for the first time he was close to  Merry. The Orcs were making a  
great deal of noise,  shouting and  clashing  their weapons, and the hobbits 
managed to whisper together for a while. 
     'I don't think much of this,' said Merry. 'I feel nearly done in. Don't 
think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.' 
     'Lembas!' whispered Pippin.  'Lembas: I've got some. Have  you? I  don't  
think they've taken anything but our swords.' 
     'Yes,  I  had a packet in  my pocket,'  answered Merry, 'but it must be 
battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket!' 
     'You won't have to. I've--'; but just then  a savage kick warned Pippin 
that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful. 
     The night was  cold  and still. All round the knoll  on which  the  Orcs 
were gathered little watch-fires sprang up,  golden-red  in the  darkness, a  
complete ring  of them. They were within a long bowshot.  but the riders did 
not  show themselves against  the light,  and the  Orcs wasted  many  arrows 
shooting at the  fires, until Ugl®k  stopped them. The riders made no sound.  
Later  in the night when the moon came  out of the  mist,  then occasionally 
they could be seen, shadowy  shapes that glinted now and again in the  white 
light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol. 
     'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why 
don't we get together and charge through? What's old Ugl®k think he's doing, 
I should like to know?' 
     'I daresay you would,' snarled Ugl®k stepping up from behind.   'Meaning 
I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the  other rabble: the 
maggots and the apes of Lugb®rz. No good trying  to charge with them. They'd 
just squeal  and bolt,  and  there  are  more than  enough of  these  filthy 
horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat. 
     'There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets 
in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from 
all  I've   heard;  and  don't  forget  their  horses!   They  can  see  the 

####-night-breeze,  or  so it's  said. Still  there's  one thing the fine fellows 
don't know: Mauh®r and his lads are  in the forest, and they  should turn up 
any time now.' 
     Ugl®k's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy  the Isengarders; but 
the  other Orcs  were  both  dispirited  and  rebellious.  They posted a few 
watchers,  but  most of them lay  on  the ground,  resting  in the  pleasant 
darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the moon passed westward 
into thick cloud, and  Pippin could not  see anything  a few feet away.  The 
fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders were not, however, content 
merely to wait  for  the dawn and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on 
the  east side of the  knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that 
some of the Men  had ridden in  close, slipped  off their horses, crawled to 
the edge of the camp and killed several Orcs, and then had faded away again. 
Ugl®k dashed off to stop a stampede. 
     Pippin  and  Merry sat up.  Their guards,  Isengarders,  had  gone with 
Ugl®k. But  if the hobbits  had any thought of escape, it was soon dashed. A 
long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew  them close  together. 
Dimly they were  aware of  Grishnbkh's great head and hideous  face  between 
them; his foul breath  was on their cheeks. He began  to paw  them  and feel  
them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down his back. 
     'Well,  my little  ones!' said Grishnbkh  in a soft whisper.  'Enjoying 
your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: swords and whips 
on one side, and nasty spears on  the other! Little people should not meddle 
_in  affairs that  are too big for them.'  His  fingers continued  to grope. 
There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes. 
     The  thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught direct from 
the urgent  thought  of his enemy:  'Grishnbkh  knows about  the  Ring! He's 
looking for it, while Ugl®k is busy: he probably wants it for himself.' Cold 
fear was in Pippin's heart,  yet at the  same time he was wondering what use 
he could make of Grishnbkh's desire. 
     'I don't think you will find it that way,' he whispered. 'It isn't easy 
to find.' 
     'Find  it? ' said Grishnbkh:  his  fingers  stopped crawling and gripped 
Pippin's shoulder. 'Find what? What are you talking about, little one?'. For  
a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness he made a noise in 
his throat: gollum, gollum. 'Nothing, my precious,' he added. 
     The hobbits felt Grishnbkh's fingers  twitch. 'O ho!' hissed the goblin 

####-softly. 'That's what he means, is it? O  ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little 
ones.' 
     'Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. 'Perhaps;  
and not only  for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it,  
or not? And what would you give for it?' 
     'Do I  want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnbkh, as if  puzzled;  but his 
arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?' 
     'We  mean,'  said Pippin, choosing his  wor ds carefully,  'that it's no 
good groping in  the dark. We could save you  time and trouble. But you must  
untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.' 
     'My dear tender  little fools,' hissed Grishnbkh, 'everything you have, 
and everything you  know, will be got  out of you  in due  time: everything!  
You'll wish there was more  that  you could tell to  satisfy the Questioner, 
indeed you will:  quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no!  What 
do  you think you've  been kept alive  for? My dear  little  fellows, please 
believe me when I say that it was  not out of kindness: that's not  even one 
of Ugl®k's faults.' 
     'I find it quite  easy to  believe,' said Merry.  'But you haven't  got 
your  prey  home yet. And it doesn't seem  to  be going  your  way,  whatever  
happens. If we come  to  Isengard,  it won't  be the  great  Grishnbkh  that 
benefits: Saruman will take all  that he can find.  If you want anything for  
yourself, now's the time to do a deal.' 
     Grishnbkh  began  to  lose his  temper.  The  name  of  Saruman  seemed  
specially  to enrage him.  Time  was passing  and the disturbance was  dying 
down. Ugl®k or the Isengarders might return at any minute. 
     'Have you got it -- either of you?' he snarled. 
     'Gollum, gollum!' said Pippin. 
     'Untie our legs!' said Merry. 
     They felt the Orc's arms  trembling violently. 'Curse  you, you  filthy 
little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your 
bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the  bones? Search  you! I'll cut 
you both to quivering shreds. I don't need the help  of your legs to get you  
away-and have you all to myself!' 
     Suddenly  he seized them. The strength in  his  long arms and shoulders 
was  terrifying. He  tucked  them one under  each  armpit, and crushed  them 
fiercely to his sides; a great stifling hand was clapped  over each of their 
mouths. Then he sprang forward,  stooping low. Quickly and silently he went, 

####-until he  came to the edge  of the knoll. There, choosing a gap  between the 
watchers, he passed like an evil shadow out into the  night, down  the slope 
and away westward  towards the river that  flowed out of the forest. In that 
direction there was a wide open space with only one fire. 
     After going  a  dozen yards he  halted,  peering and listening. Nothing 
could be  seen or heard. He crept  slowly  on, bent almost  double. Then  he 
squatted and listened  again. Then he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash. 
At that very moment the  dark form of a  rider loomed up  right  in front of 
him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called out. 
     Grishnbkh flung himself on the ground flat,  dragging the hobbits under  
him; then he drew his sword.  No doubt he meant to kill his captives, rather  
than allow them  to escape or to  be rescued;  but  it  was his undoing. The 
sword  rang faintly, and glinted a  little in the light of the fire away  to 
his left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed with skill, 
or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He dr opped the  sword  and 
shrieked. There was a quick beat of hoofs, and  even as  Grishnbkh leaped up 
and  ran,  he  was ridden down and  a spear  passed through  him.  He gave a  
hideous shivering cry and lay still. 
     The hobbits remained flat on  the  ground, as  Grishnbkh had left them. 
Another  horseman came riding swiftly  to his comrade's aid. Whether because 
of some special keenness of sight, or because of some other sense, the horse 
lifted  and sprang lightly over them; but its rider did  not see them, lying 
covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, and too afraid to 
move. 
     At  last  Merry stirred and whispered softly: 'So  far so good: but how 
are we to avoid being spitted?' 
     The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnbkh  had  roused 
the Orcs. From the yells  and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits 
guessed  that their  disappearance had been discovered:  Ugl®k  was probably 
knocking  off  a  few  more  heads.  Then suddenly  the answering  cries  of 
orc-voices came from the  right, outside the circle of watch-fires, from the 
direction of the forest and the mountains. Mauh®r had apparently arrived and 
was attacking the besiegers. There was  the sound  of galloping  horses. The 
Riders  were  drawing  in  their  ring  close  round the  knoll, risking the 
orc-arrows, so as  to prevent any sortie, while a company  rode off to  deal 
with the newcomers.  Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized  that without moving 
they were now outside the circle: there was nothing between them and escape. 

####-     'Now,' said Merry,  'if only we had our legs  and hands free,  we might 
get away. But I can't touch the knots, and I can't bite them.' 
     'No need to  try,'  said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed 
to free  my  hands. These loops are only  left for show. You'd better have a  
bit of lembas first.' 
     He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes 
were broken, but good,  still in their leaf-wrappings. The  hobbits each ate 
two  or three  pieces.  The  taste brought  back  to them the memory of fair 
faces,  and laughter, and wholesome food in  quiet  days now far away. For a 
while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless  of the cries and 
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present. 
     'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnbkh's sword was lying 
close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled 
forward, and finding the body of the goblin  he  drew from its sheath a long 
sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds.  
     'Now for it!' he said. 'When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be 
able  to stand again, and  walk.  But  in any case  we  had better start  by 
crawling.' 
     They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but 
it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide  berth,  and 
wormed their way  forward bit  by  bit, until  they came to the edge  of the 
river, gurgling away in  the black shadows under its deep   banks. Then  they 
looked back. 
     The sounds  had  died away.  Evidently  Mauh®r  and his 'lads' had been 
killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil. 
It would not last very much longer. Already  the night was old. In the East, 
which had remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale. 
     'We must get under cover,' said  Pippin, 'or we  shall be seen. It will 
not  be any  comfort  to us, if  these riders discover that we are  not Orcs 
after we are dead.' He got up and stamped his feet. 'Those cords have cut me 
like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What 
about you, Merry?' 
     Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can  manage it. Lembas does put  heart 
into  you! A more  wholesome sort  of  feeling, too, than  the heat  of that 
orc-draught.  I  wonder  what it was made of. Better not to  know, I expect. 
Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!' 
     'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!' 

####-     They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river. 
Behind them the light grew in the East. As they  walked they compared notes,  
talking  lightly in  hobbit-fashion of the things  that  had happened  since 
their capture. No listener would  have guessed from their words that they had 
suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope towards torment  
and death; or that even now, as they knew  well,  they had  little chance of 
ever finding friend or safety again. 
     'You seem to  have been doing well, Master Took,' said Merry.  'You will 
get  almost  a chapter in old Bilbo's book, if ever I get a chance to report 
to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain's little game, and 
playing up to him. But I wonder if anyone will  ever pick up your trail  and 
find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid  yours is gone 
for good. 
     'I  shall have  to brush up my  toes,  if I am to  get level  with you. 
Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is wher e he comes in. I 
don't  suppose  you have much notion  where we are;  but I spent  my time at 
Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end 
of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.' 
     Even as he spoke the da rk edge of the  forest loomed up straight before 
them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees, creeping away 
from the coming Dawn. 
     'Lead on, Master  Brandybuck!' said Pippin. 'Or lead back! We have been 
warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.' 
     'I have  not,' answered Merry; 'but the forest seems better to  me, all 
the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.' 
     He  led the way  in under the  huge branches  of  the trees. Old beyond 
guessing, they  seemed. Great  trailing  beards of lichen  hung  from  them, 
blowing and swaying in  the breeze. Out of the  shadows the  hobbits peeped, 
gazing back down the slope: little  furtive  figures  that in the  dim light 
looked like elf-children  in the deeps  of time peering out of the Wild Wood  
in wonder at their first Dawn. 
     Far  over the  Great  River,  and the  Brown  Lands,  leagues upon grey 
leagues away, the Dawn came,  red as flame.  Loud rang the hunting-horns  to 
greet it.  The Rider s of Rohan sprang suddenly  to life. Horn  answered horn 
again. 
     Merry and  Pippin heard,  clear  in  the  cold  air,  the  neighing  of 
war-horses, and  the  sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was lifted, 

####-an  arc of  fire,  above the margin of the world. Then with a great  cry the 
Riders charged from  the East; the red  light gleamed on mail and spear. The 
Orcs yelled  and shot all the arrows that remained to  them. The hobbits saw 
several horsemen fall; but their line held on up  the hill  and  over it, and 
wheeled round and charged  again. Most  of the raiders that were  left alive 
then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But 
one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the  
direction  of  the  forest.  Straight up the slope they charged  towards the 
watchers. Now they were drawing near,  and it seemed certain that they would 
escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way. 
     'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Ugl®k! I don't want to 
meet him again.' The hobbits turned and  fled deep into the  shadows of  the 
wood. 
     So it  was  that  they did not sec  the  last  stand,  when  Ugl®k  was 
overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he was slain 
at last by Jomer,  the Third Marshal  of the Mark, who dismounted and fought 
him  sword to sword.  And over  the  wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted 
down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly. 
     Then when they had  laid their fallen comrades in a  mound and had sung 
their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of their 
enemies.  So ended  the raid, and no  news  of  it came ever back either  to 
Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of  the burning rose high to heaven and 
was seen by many watchful eyes.  
 

####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Treebeard 

 
 
     Meanwhile the hobbits went with  as much speed as  the dark and tangled  
forest allowed, following  the line of the  running  stream, westward and up 
towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper into  Fangorn. Slowly 
their fear of the Orcs died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling 
feeling came  over  them,  as  if the air were  too thin or too  scanty  for  
breathing. 
     At last Merry halted.  'We can't go on like this,' he  panted.  'I want 
some air.' 
     'Let's have  a  drink  at any rate,'  said  Pippin. 'I'm  parched.'  He 
clambered on to a  great tree-root that  wound  down  into the  stream,  and 
stooping drew up some water in his cupped hands. It was clear and  cold, and 
he  took many draughts.  Merry followed  him.  The water refreshed them  and 
seemed  to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink of 
the  stream,  dabbling  their  sore feet and legs, and peering round at  the 
trees that  stood silently about them, rank upon rank, until they faded away 
into grey twilight in every direction. 
     'I suppose you  haven't  lost us already?'  said  Pippin,  leaning back  
against  a great tree-trunk.  'We  can  at  least follow the  course of this 
stream, the Entwash or whatever you call  it, and get  out again  the way we 
came.' 
     'We could, if  our legs  would  do it,' said  Merry;  'and if  we could 
breathe properly.' 
     'Yes, it is  all  very  dim,  and stuffy,  in   here,' said Pippin.  'It 
reminds me, somehow, of the  old room in the  Great Place of  the Tooks away 
back in the  Smials at Tuckborough:  a huge place,  where  the furniture has 
never been moved or changed for generations. They say  the Old Took lived in 
it  year  after  year,  while  he  and  the  room  got  older  and  shabbier  
together -and  it has  never changed since  he  died, a century ago.  And Old 
Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that  puts it back a bit. But that 
is  nothing  to the old feeling of  this  wood.  Look at  all those weeping, 
trailing,  beards and whiskers of lichen! And  most of the trees seem  to be 
half covered with ragged dry  leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can't  
imagine what spring  would look  like here, if  i t ever comes; still  less a  
spring-cleaning.' 

####-     'But the Sun at any  rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does 
not look or feel at all like Bilbo's  description of Mirkwood.  That was all 
dark and black,  and the home  of dark black  things. This is just dim,  and 
frightfully  tree-ish.  You  can't imagine animals  living here  at all,  or 
staying for long.' 
     'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying 
to get through  it  either.  Nothing to cat  for a  hundred  miles, I should 
guess. How are our supplies?' 
     'Low,'  said Merry.  'We ran  off  with nothing but a  couple of  spare 
packets  of  lembas, and  left everything else behind.' They  looked at what 
remained of the  elven-cakes:  broken  fragments for abou t five meagre days, 
that  was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry.  'We shall be cold 
tonight, whichever way we go.' 
     'Well, we'd  better decide on  the way now,' said  Pippin. 'The morning 
must be getting on.' 
     Just then they became  aware of a yellow light that  had appeared, some 
way further  on into the  wood: shafts  of sunlight seemed  suddenly to have  
pierced the forest -roof. 
     'Hullo!' said Merry.  'The Sun must have run into a cloud  while  we've 
been under these  trees, and now she  has  run  out  again; or  else she has 
climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far let's go 
and investigate!' 
     They  found  it was  further than  they thought. The  ground was rising 
steeply  still,  and  it was becoming  increasingly stony.  The  light  grew 
broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock -wall before 
them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of  some long root thrust out by 
the distant mountains.  No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on 
its stony face. The twigs of the trees at  its foot were stretched out stiff 
and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where  all had looked so shabby 
and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the  
smooth 
black-greys  of bark  like polished leather.  The boles of the trees  glowed 
with a soft green like young grass: early spring or  a fleeting vision of it 
was about them. 
     In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural 
perhaps, and  made by the weathering  and splitting  of the rock, for it was 
rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest -trees, there 

####-was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at 
its edge, and  one old stump of a tree  with only two bent branches left: it 
looked almost  like the figure  of some gnarled  old  man,  standing  there, 
blinking in the morning-light. 
     'Up  we go!' said Merry joyfully. 'Now for a breath of air, and a sight 
of the land!' 
     They climbed  and scrambled up the rock. If the  stair had been made it 
was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were  too eager to  be 
surprised at the  remarkable  way  in  which the  cuts  and  sores of  their 
captivity  had healed and their  vigour had returned. They came at length to 
the edge  of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they sprang 
up  and  turned  round  with their backs  to the  hill, breathing  deep, and 
looking  out eastward. They saw  that they had  only come some three or four 
miles  into the  forest:  the heads  of the  trees marched  down  the slopes 
towards the  plain. There, near the fringe  of  the forest,  tall spires  of 
curling black smoke went up, wavering and floating towards them. 
     'The wind's changing,'  said Merry.  'It's  turned east again. It feels 
cool up here.' 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin; 'I'm  afraid this is only a passing  gleam, and it 
will  all go grey  again. What a  pity! This  shaggy  old  forest  looked so 
different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.' 
     'Almost felt you liked the  Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind 
of you,' said  a strange voice.  'Turn round and let  me have a look at your 
faces. I almost feel that  I dislike you  both, but do  not let us be hasty. 
Turn round!' A large knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders,  
and they  were twisted round,  gently but irresistibly; then  two great arms 
lifted them up. 
     They  found that they  were looking  at a  most extraordinary face.  It 
belonged to a  large  Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen 
foot high,  very sturdy, with a tall  head,  and hardly any neck. Whether it 
was clad in stuff like green  and grey  bark, or  whether that was its hide, 
was  difficult to say. At any  rate the  arms, at a short distance from  the 
trunk, were not wrinkled,  but covered  with a brown smooth skin.  The large 
feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a  
sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy  at the roots,  thin and mossy  at 
the  ends. But  at  the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes.  These 
deep  eyes  were now  surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating. 

####-They were brown, shot  with a green light. Often  afterwards Pippin tried to 
describe his first impression of them. 
     'One felt  as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with 
ages of  memory  and long, slow,  steady  thinking;  but  their surface  was 
sparkling with  the present: like sun shimmering on the  outer  leaves of  a  
vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake.  I don't know but it  felt 
as  if  something  that grew  in the  ground-asleep, you might say, or  just  
feeling itself  as  something between  roof-tip  and leaf-tip, between  deep 
earth  and sky had suddenly waked up, and was  considering you with the same 
slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.' 
     'Hrum, Hoom,'  murmured  the  voice,  a deep  voice  like a  very  deep 
woodwind  instrument. 'Very odd indeed! Do  not  be hasty, that is my motto. 
But if I had seen you,  before I heard your voices-I liked them: nice little 
voices: they reminded me of something I cannot  remember ---if I had seen you  
before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little 
Orcs, and found out my mistake  afterwards. Very odd  you  are, indeed. Root 
and twig, very odd!' 
     Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he 
felt a curious suspense, but  not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And 
what are you?' 
     A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells 
were covered over.  'Hrum, now,' answered the voice;  'well,  I am an Ent, or  
that's  what  they call me.  Yes, Ent is the word. The Ent, I am,  you might 
say,  in your  manner  of  speaking. Fangorn is  my name according to  some, 
Treebeard others make it. Treebeard will do.' 
     'An Ent?' said  Merry.  'What's  that? But  what do you  call yourself?  
What's your real name?' 
     'Hoo now!' replied  Treebeard. 'Hoo! Now that would be  telling! Not so 
hasty.  And I  am doing the  asking. You are  in my country. What are you,  I  
wonder? I cannot place you. You do not  seem to come in the old lists that I  
learned when I was young. But  that was a long, long time ago, and  they may 
have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did it go?  
     Learn now the lore of Living Creatures! 
     First name the four, the free peoples: 
     Eldest of all, the elf-children; 
     Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses; 
     Ent the earthborn, old as mountains; 

####-     Man the mortal, master of horses: 
     Hm, hm, hm. 
     Beaver the builder, buck the leaper, 
     Bear bee-hunter, boar the fighter; 
     Hound is hungry, hare is fearful... 
     hm, hm. 
     Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture, 
     Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest 
     Swan the whitest, serpent coldest... 
     Hoom, hm; hoom. hm. how did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty toom 
tum. 
It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere!' 
     'We  always seem  to have got   left out of the  old lists, and the  old 
stories,' said  Merry.  'Yet we've been about for quite a long  time.  We're 
hobbits.' 
     'Why not make a new line?' said Pippin. 
     'Half-grown hobbits, the hole -dwellers. 
     Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got 
it.' 
     'Hm! Not bad, not bad,' said Treebeard.  'That would do. So you live in 
holes, eh? It  sounds very right and proper. Who calls  you hobbits, though?  
That does not sound elvish to me. Elves made all  the old   words: they began 
it.' 
     'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,' said Pippin. 
     'Hoom, hmm! Come  now!  Not so hasty!  You call yourselves hobbits? But 
you should not go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out your own right 
names if you're not careful.' 
     'We aren't careful about  that,' said Merry. 'As a matter of fact I'm a  
Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.' 
     'And I'm a Took, Peregrin Took,  but  I'm generally called  Pippin,  or  
even Pip.' 
     'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,' said Treebeard. 'I  am honoured by 
your confidence; but you should not be too free all at once.  There are Ents 
and  Ents, you know; or there  are Ents and things that look like  Ents  but 
ain't, as you  might say. I'll call you  Merry and Pippin if you please-nice 
names. For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.' A queer  
half-knowing,  half-humorous look came with  a green flicker into his  eyes.  

####-'For one thing it would  take a long while: my name is growing all the time, 
and I've lived a  very  long, long time; so my  name is like  a story.  Real 
names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the 
Old  Entish  as you might say. It is a lovely  language, but it takes a very 
long  time to say  anything in it, because  we do  not  say anything  in it. 
unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to. 
     'But  now,' and  the  eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to 
grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is  going  on? What are you doing in it  
all? I can see and hear  (and smell and feel) a great deal from  this,  from 
this, from this  a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-bur®ml. Excuse me: that 
is a part of my name for it; I do not know what  the word is  in the outside 
languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine 
mornings, and  think about  the Sun, and the grass beyond the wood,  and the 
horses, and the clouds, and the  unfolding of the world. What  is going  on?  
What is Gandalf up  to? And these -- burbrum,' he made a deep rumbling noise 
like a discord on a great organ --  'these Orcs, and young Saruman  down  at 
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.' 
     'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry:  'and even if we tried  to 
be quick, it  would  take a  long time to tell.  But you  told  us not to be 
hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we  
asked what you are  going to do with us, and  which side you are on? And did 
you know Gandalf?' 
     'Yes, I do know  him: the only wizard that really cares  about  trees ' 
said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?' 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin  sadly, 'we did. He  was a great friend, and he was 
our guide.' 
     'Then I  can answer your other  questions,' said  Treebeard. 'I  am not 
going to do anything with you: not if you mean by that 'do something  to you ' 
without your  leave. We might  do  some things together. I don't  know about 
sides. I go my own way; but your way may go along with mine for a while. But 
you speak of Master  Gandalf,  as if he was  in a story that had come  to an 
end.' 
     'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I 
am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.' 
     'Hoo,  come  now!'  said  Treebeard.   'Hoom, hm, ah  well.'  He paused, 
looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come 
now!' 

####-     'If you  would like to hear more. said Merry, 'we will tell you. But it 
will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us  down? Couldn't we sit here 
together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us 
up.' 
     'Hm,  tired? No. I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do not 
sit down. I am not very. hm, bendable. But there.  the  Sun is  going in. Let 
us leave this  -- did you say what you call it?' 
     'Hill?' suggested Pippin. 'Shelf? Step?' suggested Merry. 
     Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. 'Hill. Yes, that was it. But 
it is a hasty word  for  a thing that has stood here ever since this part of 
the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it, and go.' 
     'Where shall we go?' asked Merry. 
     'To my home, or one of my homes,' answered Treebeard. 
     'Is it far?' 
     'I do not  know.  You might  call it far, perhaps.  But what does  tha t 
matter?' 
     'Well,  you see, we have lost all our belongings,' said Merry. 'We have 
only a little food.' 
     'O!  Hm! You need not  trouble about that,' said Treebeard. 'I can give 
you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long, long while. And 
if we decide to part company, I can  set you down outside my  country at any 
point you choose. Let us go!' 
     Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one  in  the crook of each  arm, 
Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the  other, and  moved them 
to the  edge  of  the  shelf. The  rootlike  toes grasped  the  rocks.  Then 
carefully  and solemnly, he  stalked down from step to step, and reached the 
floor of the Forest. 
     At once he set off with  long  deliberate strides  through  the  trees, 
deeper  and  deeper into  the  wood, never  far  from  the  stream, climbing 
steadily up  towards  the slopes of the mountains. Many of the  trees seemed 
asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that merely passed by;  
but  some quivered, and some  raised up  their branches above his head as he 
approached.  All  the  while, as he walked, he  talked to  himself in a long 
running stream of musical sounds.  
     The hobbits  were silent for some time. They  felt, oddly  enough, safe 
and  comfortable, and they had a great deal  to think and wonder  about.  At  
last Pippin ventured to speak again. 

####-     'Please, Treebeard,' he said,  'could I  ask  you  something?  Why  did 
Celeborn  warn  us  against  your forest?  He  told us  not to  risk getting 
entangled in it.' 
     'Hmm,  did he now?' rumbled  Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the 
same, if you had been going the other way. Do  not risk getting entangled in 
the  woods of  Laurelindurenan ! That  is what the Elves used to call it, but 
now they  make the  name  shorter: Lothlurien they call it. Perhaps they are 
right: maybe it is fading;  not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold, 
that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is 
a queer  place, and  not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that 
you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not 
happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land. 
     'And  so is  this. Folk have  come  to grief here. Aye, they  have ,  to 
grief.  Laurelindurenan lindelorendor malinornjlion ornemalin ,' he hummed to 
himself. 'They are falling rather  behind  the world in  there, I guess,' he 
said 'Neither  this country, nor anything else  outside the Golden  Wood, is 
what it was when Celeborn was young. Still: 
     Taurelilumla-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurla Lumlanor,1 
     that is what  they used to say.  Things have  changed, but it is  still 
true in places.' 
     'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?' 
     'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that 
goes  on myself, so I cannot explain it  to  you. Some of us are  still true 
Ents, and  lively enough  in our fashion, but many are growing sleepy, going 
tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are ju st trees, of course; but 
many are half  awake. Some  are quite wide awake, and a  few are,  well, ah,  
well getting Entish. That is going on all the time. 
     'When that happens to  a  tree,  you find that  some have  bad  hearts.  
Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old 
willows  down  the Entwash, gone  long ago,  alas!  They were  quite hollow, 
indeed  they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and  sweet-spoken as a  
young  leaf.  And  then  there are  some  trees  in  the  valleys  under the 
mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through.  That sort of thing seems 
to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There 
are still some very black patches.' 
     'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry. 
     'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some 

####-shadow of the Great Darkness  lying there still away north; and bad memories 
are handed down. But there are hollow dales in this land where the  Darkness 
has never been lifted, and the trees are older  than I am. Still, we do what 
we can. We keep off strangers and the  foolhardy; and we train and we teach, 
we walk and we weed. 
     'We are tree-herds, we old  Ents. Few  enough of us are left now. Sheep 
get  like shepherd, and shepherds like  sheep, it is said;  but  slowly, and 
neither have  long in the world. It  is quicker and  closer with  trees  and 
Ents, and they walk down the  ages  together. For Ents are more like  Elves:  
less interested  in   themselves than Men are,  and  better at getting inside 
other things.  And yet again  Ents are more like Men,  more  changeable than 
Elves are, and  quicker at taking the colour of the outside,  you might say.  
Or  better than both:  for they are steadier a nd keep their  minds on things 
longer. 'Some of my kin look just  like trees now, and need something  great 
to  rouse them; and they speak  only in whispers. But  some  of my trees are 
limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of course, waking trees 
up  and  teaching  them to speak and  learning their  tree-talk. They always 
wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did. But then the Great Darkness 
came, and they passed away  over the Sea, or fled into far  valleys, and hid 
themselves,  and made  songs  about days that would never come again.  Never 
again. Aye,  aye, there was all  one wood once upon a time: from here to the 
Mountains of Lune, and this was just the East End. 
     'Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing a ll day 
and  hear no more  than  the echo of my own  voice in the hollow hills.  The 
woods were like the woods of Lothlurien. only thicker stronger, younger. And 
the smell of the air! I used to spend a week just breathing.' 
     Treebeard  fell silent, striding along, and yet  making  hardly a sound 
with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed into a murmuring 
chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was chanting to them: 
     In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring. 
     Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion! 
     And I said that was good. 
     I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand. 
     Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir! 
     And I thought that was best. 
     To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn. 
     Ah!  the  gold and the red  and the sighing of leaves  in the Autumn in  

####-Taur-na-neldor! 
     It was more than my desire. 
     To the pine-trees upon the  highland of  Dorthonion  I climbed  in  the 
Winter. 
     Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black  branches  of  Winter upon 
Orod-na-Thfn! 
     My voice went up and sang in the sky. 
     And now all those lands lie under the wave. 
     And I walk in Ambaruna, in Tauremorna, in Aldaluml. 
     In my own land, in the country of Fangorn, 
     Where the roots are long, 
     And the years lie thicker than the leaves 
     In Tauremornaluml. 
     He  ended, and strode on silently, and in all  the wood, as far  as ear 
could reach, there was not a sound. 
     The day  waned,  and dusk was twined about  the boles of  the trees. At  
last  the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had 
come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras.  
Down the hillside  the young Entwash,  leaping  from its springs  high above,  
ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there 
was  a long slope, clad with grass, now  grey in the twilight. No trees grew 
there  and  it  was  open  to  the sky;  stars were shining already in lakes 
between shores of cloud.  
     Treebeard  strode  up the slope,  hardly  slackening his pace. Suddenly 
before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one 
on  either side, like living gate-posts; bu t  there was  no gate  save their 
crossing and interwoven boughs. As  the old Ent approached, the trees lifted 
up their branches, and all  their leaves quivered and rustled. For they were 
evergreen trees, and their leaves were dark and polished, and gleamed in the 
twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great 
hall had been cut  in the side of the hill. On either hand the  walls sloped 
upwards, until they were fifty feet high  or more, and along each wall stood 
an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.  
     At the far end the rock -wall was sheer,  but at  the bottom it had been 
hollowed back into a  shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of  the 
hall, save the branches  of  the trees, which  at the inner end overshadowed 
all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream 

####-escaped from  the springs above,  and leaving the main  water, fell tinkling 
down  the  sheer face  of the wall, pouring in silver  drops,  like  a   fine 
curtain  in front  of the arched bay. The water was  gathered  again into  a  
stone basin in the floor between the trees, and thence it spilled and flowed 
away beside the open path, out  to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through 
the forest. 
     'Hm! Here we are!' said Treebeard, breaking his  long silence.  'I have 
brought you about  seventy  thousand  ent-strides, but what that comes to in 
the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow we are near the roots  of 
the  Last Mountain.  Part of the name of this place might be Wellinghall, if 
it were turned into your language. I like it. We will stay here tonight.' He 
set them  down  on  the  grass  between  the aisles  of the  trees, and they 
followed  him  towards the great arch. The  hobbits  now  noticed that as he 
walked his  knees  hardly bent, but  his  legs opened in  a great stride. He 
planted  his big toes (and they  were indeed  big, and very  broad)  on  the 
ground first, before any other part of his feet. 
     For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling  spring, and 
took a deep breath;  then he laughed, and passed inside. A great stone table 
stood there, but  no chairs. At  the back of the  bay  it was already  quite 
dark. Treebeard lifted two  great  vessels and stood them on the table. They 
seemed to  be  filled with water;  but he  held  his  hands over  them,  and 
immediately they began to glow,  one with a golden and the other with a rich 
green light; and  the blending of the two lights lit the bay; as  if the sun 
of  summer  was  shining through a roof of young  leaves. Looking back,  the 
hobbits saw that the trees in  the court had also begun to glow,  faintly at 
first, but steadily quickening, until  every leaf was edged with light: some 
green,  some gold, some red as  copper; while  the  tree-trunks  looked like 
pillars moulded out of luminous stone. 
     'Well, well, now we can talk again,' said Treebeard. 'You are thirsty I 
expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!' He went to the  back of the 
bay, and  then they saw that several tall stone jars stood there, with heavy 
lids. He removed  one of the lids, and dipped  in a great ladle, and with it 
filled three bowls, one very large bowl, and two smaller ones.  
     'This is an ent-house,' he said, 'and there are no seats, I  fear.  But 
you may sit on the table.'  Picking  up the hobbits he set them on the great 
stone  slab, six feet  above the  ground, and there they  sat dangling their 
legs, and drinking in sips. 

####-     The  drink was  like water, indeed very like  the taste of the draughts 
they had drunk from the  Entwash near, the borders  of the  forest,  and yet 
there was  some scent or savour in  it which they could not describe: it was 
faint, but it reminded them of  the smell of a distant wood borne  from afar 
by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the  draught began at the toes, and 
rose  steadily  through every limb, bringing  refreshment  and vigour  as it 
coursed upwards, right to the tips of the hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that 
the  hair  on  their heads was actually standing up,  waving and curling and 
growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet  in the basin beyond  the 
arch, and then he  drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow  draught. 
The hobbits thought he would never stop. 
     At last he  set the bowl down again. 'Ah -- ah,' he sighed. 'Hm,  hoom, 
now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and  I will lie down; that 
will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.' 
     On the right side of  the  bay there  was a great bed on low legs;  not 
more than a couple of feet high,  covered  deep in dried grass  and bracken. 
Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of 
bending at his  middle),  until he lay at full  length, with his arms behind 
his head, looking up at the ceiling. upon which lights were flickering, like 
the  play of leaves  in the sunshine. Merry  and Pippin  sat  beside him  on 
pillows of grass.  
     'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard. 
     The hobbits began to tell him the story of their  adventures ever since 
they left Hobbiton. They followed  no very clear order, for they interrupted 
one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the  speaker, and  went 
back to some earlier point, or  jumped forward asking questions  about later  
events. They said  nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why 
they set  out or  where they  were going to;  and he  did not  ask  for  any 
reasons.  
     He  was  immensely interested in  everything: in  the  Black Riders, in 
Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and  Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of 
Moria, and in Lothlurien  and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and 
its country over and over  again. He  said an odd thing at  this point.  'You 
never see any, hm, any Ents round  there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents,  
Entwives I should really say.' 
     'Entwives?' said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?' 
     Yes,  hm,  well   no:  I  do  not  really  know   now,  said  Treebeard 

####-thoughtfully. 'But they would like your country, so I just wondered.' 
     Treebeard  was  however   especially  interested   in  everything  that 
concerned Gandalf;  and  most  interested of  all  in Saruman's  doings. The 
hobbits  regretted  very much that  they  knew so little  about them: only a  
rather  vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told  the Council.  But they  
were clear  at  any rate that  Ugl®k and  his troop  came from Isengard, and 
spoke of Saruman as their master. 
     'Hm, hoom!'  said  Treebeard,  when at last  their story  had wound and 
wandered  down to the battle of the Orcs  and  the Riders  of Rohan.  'Well, 
well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me  all, no 
indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you a re  doing as Gandalf 
would wish. There is something very  big going on, that I can see, and  what 
it is maybe I shall learn  in good time, or in bad time. By  root  and twig, 
but  it  is a strange business: up sprout a  little folk that are not in the 
old lists,  and behold  the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and 
Gandalf takes them  on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras 
Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the  leagues  of Wilderland:  indeed 
they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!' 
     'And what about yourself?' asked Merry. 
     'Hoom, hm, I have not troubled  about the  Great Wars,' said Treebeard; 
'they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wizards: Wizards 
are always troubled  about the future.  I  do not like  worrying  about  the 
future. I am not  altogether on anybody's side, because nobody is altogether  
on my  side, if you understand me: nobody cares  for the woods as I care for  
them, not even  Elves nowadays. Still,  I  take more kindly to Elves than  to 
others: it was the Elves that cured us of  dumbness long ago, and that was a  
great gift that cannot be forgotten, though our  ways have parted since. And 
there are  some things, of  course, whose side I am altogether not  on; I am 
against  them altogether: these -- burbrum' (he again  made a deep rumble of 
disgust)' -- these Orcs, and their masters.  
     'I  used to  be  anxious  when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when  it 
removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while : Mordor is a long way away. 
But it seems that the wind is setting  East,  and the withering of all woods 
may  be  drawing near.  There is naught that an old Ent can  do to hold back  
that storm: he must weather it or crack. 
     'But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook him. I must  
do something. I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I should do about 

####-Saruman.' 
     'Who is  Saruman?'  asked  Pippin.  'Do  you know  anything  about  his 
history?'  'Saruman is  a  Wizard,' answered Treebeard.  'More  than  that I 
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They  appeared first after  
the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with  the Ships  I never  
can tell. Saruman was  reckoned great among them.  I  believe.  He  gave  up 
wandering  about and minding the  affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago -- 
you would call it a very long time ago: and he settled down at Angrenost, or  
Isengard  as the Men of Rohan call  it. He was very quiet to begin with, but 
his fame began to gr ow. He was  chosen to be head of the White Council, they 
say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now  if even  then Saruman 
was not turning to evil ways. But at any  rate he used to give no trouble to 
his neighbours. I used to talk to him.  There was a time when  he was always 
walking about my woods. He was polite in  those days, always asking my leave 
(at  least when he  met me); and always  eager  to  listen. I told him  many 
things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me 
in like kind. I  cannot remember that he ever told.  me anything. And he got 
more and more like that; his face, as I remember  it-I  have not seen it for  
many  a  day-became  like windows  in  a stone  wall: windows with  shutters 
inside. 
     'I think  that I now understand  what he is  up  to. He  is plotting to 
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels;  and he does not care for  
growing things, except as far as they serve him for the  moment.  And now it 
is clear that he is a  black traitor. He has taken up  with  foul folk, with 
the Orcs. Brm,  hoom! Worse than that: he  has been doing something to them; 
something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a 
mark of evil things that came in the Great  Darkness  that they cannot abide 
the Sun;  but Saruman's  Orcs  can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder  
what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of 
Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!' 
     Treebeard  rumbled for a moment, as if he  were pronouncing some  deep, 
subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some  time ago I began to wonder  how Orcs 
dared to pass  through my woods so  freely,'  he went on. 'Only lately did I 
guess that  Saruman was to blame, and that  long ago he had been spying  out 
all the ways, and discovering  my secrets. He and his  foul folk are  making 
havoc now. Down on the borders  they are  felling  trees-good trees. Some of 
the trees they just cut down and leave to rot -- orc-mischief that; but most  

####-are hewn up and  carried off to feed  the fires of Orthanc. There is always a  
smoke rising from Isengard these days.  
     'Curse  him, root and branch!  Many  of those  trees  were  my  friends 
creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their  own that 
are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump  and bramble where once 
there were singing groves. I have been idle. I have let things slip. It must 
stop!' 
     Treebeard raised  himself  from  his  bed  with a jerk,  stood  up, and 
thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and sent up two  
jets  of  flame.  There  was a flicker like green fire in his  eyes, and his 
beard stood out stiff as a great besom. 
     'I will  stop it!' he boomed. 'And  you shall come  with me. You may be 
able  to help me. You will be helping your own friends that way, too; for if 
Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well 
as 
in front. Our roads go together -- to Isengard!' 
     'We will come with you,' said Merry. 'We will do wha t we can.' 
     'Yes!' said  Pippin. 'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I 
should like  to be there, even if I could not  be of much use: I shall never  
forget Ugl®k and the crossing of Rohan.' 
     'Good! Good!'  said  Treebeard. 'But I spoke   hastily. We must  not  be 
hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it is easier 
to shout stop! than to do it.' 
     He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain 
of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever the  drops of 
water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted like red and green 
sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed again and was silent. 
     After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring  again. He seemed to be 
counting  on his fingers. 'Fangorn,  Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,' he sighed. 
'The trouble is  that there are so  few of us left,' he said turning towards 
the hobbits. 'Only  three remain of the first Ents that walked in the  woods 
before  the  Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and  Finglas  and Fladrif  -- to 
give them their Elvish names; you may call them Leaflock and Skinbark if you  
like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for  
this business. Leaflock has grown sleepy. almost  tree-ish, you might say: he 
has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the 
deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He 

####-used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been  too drowsy to walk   far 
even then.  Skinbark  lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is 
where the worst  trouble  has been. He was wounded by the Orcs,  and many of 
his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up 
into the high places, among the birches that he loves  best, and he will not 
come down. Still,  I  daresay I  could get  together a fair company  of  our 
younger folks-if  I could make  them understand the  need: if I could  rouse 
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity the re are so few of us!' 
     'Why are there so few  when  you  have  lived in this country so long?' 
asked Pippin. 'Have a great many died?' 
     'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None  have died from  inside, as  you  might 
say. Some have  fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and 
more have  grown tree-ish. But  there were never many of us and we have  not 
increased. There have been no Entings  -- no children, you would say, not for  
a terrible long count of years. You see, we lost the Entwives.' 
     'How very sad!' said Pippin. 'How was it that they all died?' 
     'They did not die!' said Treebeard. 'I never said died. We lost them, I 
said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk  
knew that. There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung 
among  Elves  and  Men  from  Mirkwood  to  Gondor.  They  cannot  be  quite 
forgotten.' 
     'Well, I  am  afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to 
the Shire,'  said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the 
songs?' 
     'Yes, I will indeed,' said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request. 
'But  I  cannot  tell it properly, only in short; and then  we  must end our 
talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey 
to begin.' 
     'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When 
the  world  was young, and the woods were  wide  and wild,  the Ents and the 
Entwives  --  and  there  were  Entmaidens  then:  ah!   the  loveliness  of 
Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the  lightfooted, in the days of our  youth! -- they 
walked  together  and they  housed together.  But our  hearts did not  go on 
growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in 
the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents 
loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills; 
and they drank of the mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees 

####-let fall in their path;  and they learned of  the Elves and  spoke  with the 
Trees. But  the Entwives gave their  minds to the  lesser trees, and to  the 
meads in the sunshine  beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe 
in the thicket, and  the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring, and 
the green herbs in the waterlands in summer, and the seeding grasses in  the 
autumn  fields. They  did  not desire  to  speak with these things; but they 
wished  them to  hear and obey what was said to  them. The  Entwives ordered 
them to  grow  according to  their wishes, and bear leaf and fruit to  their 
liking; for the Entwives desired order, and plenty, and peace (by which they 
meant that things should remain  where they had set them).  So the  Entwives 
made gardens to live in. But  we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to 
the gardens  now and again. Then when the  Darkness came  in  the North, the 
Entwives crossed  the Great  River, and made new  gardens,  and  tilled  new 
fields, and  we saw  them more seldom. After the Darkness was overthrown the 
land of the Entwives blossomed richly,  and their  fields were full of corn. 
Many men learned the crafts of  the  Entwives and honoured them greatly; but 
we were only a legend to them, a secret in the heart of the forest. Yet here 
we still are,  while  all  the gardens of the Entwives are  wasted: Men call 
them the Brown Lands now. 
     'I remember it was  long ago --  in the time of  the war between Sauron 
and the Men of the Sea -- desire came over me to see Fimbrethil  again. Very 
fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen her, though  little like 
the  Entmaiden  of old.  For  the Entwives were bent  and  browned  by their  
labour; their hair  parched  by the sun to the hue  of ripe corn  and  their 
cheeks  like  red apples.  Yet their eyes were still  the eyes  of  our  own 
people.  We  crossed  over Anduin and came to  their  land:  but  we found a  
desert: it was all  burned and uprooted, for war had passed over it. But the 
Entwives were not there. Long  we called, and long we searched; and we asked 
all  folk  that  we  met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had 
never seen them;  and  some said that they had seen them walking  away west, 
and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that we went could we find 
them. Our sorrow was very great. Yet the wild  wood called, and we  returned 
to it. For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the 
Entwives.  walking far and wide and  calling  them by their beautiful names.  
But as time passed we went  more  seldom and  wandered less far. And now the 
Entwives are only a memory for us, and our  beards  are  long and  grey. The 
Elves made many songs concerning the Search of  the  Ents,  and some of  the 

####-songs passed into the tongues of  Men. But we made  no songs about it, being 
content to chant  their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives.  We 
believe that we may meet again in  a time to come, and perhaps we shall find 
somewhere  a  land where we can live together and both be content. But it is 
foreboded  that tha t will only be  when we have  both  lost all  that we now 
have.  And  it may  well be that that time is  drawing near at last. For  if 
Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely  to wither 
all the woods.  
     'There  was  an Elvish  song  that  spoke  of this, or at  least  so  I 
understand  it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never 
an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But 
we  know it by heart, and  hum it now and again. This  is how it runs in your 
tongue: 
     ENT. 
     When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough; 
     When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow;  
     When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain -air, 
     Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade; 
     When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid; 
     When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air, 
     I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair. 
 
     ent. 
     When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold  
     Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold; 
     When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West, 
     Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown; 
     When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town ; 
     When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West, 
     I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best! 
 

####-     ent. 
     When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay; 
     When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day; 
     When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain  
     I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to thee again! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at last; 
     When broken is the barren bough, and light and labour past; 
     I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again: 
     Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain! 
 
     both. 
     Together we will take the road that leads into the West, 
     And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest.' 
 
     Treebeard ended  his song.  'That  is  how it goes,'  he  said.  'It is 
Elvish, of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I daresay it is 
fair  enough. But the Ents could say  more on their side,  if they had time! 
But now I am going to stand  up  and  take  a little sleep.  Where  will you  
stand?' 
     'We usually  lie down to  sleep,' said Merry.  'We  shall  be all right 
where we are.' 
     'Lie down to sleep!' said Treebeard. 'Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I  
was  forgetting:  singing that song  put  me in mind  of  old times;  almost  
thought that I was talking to young Entings, I did. Well, you can lie on the 
bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good night!' 
     Merry  and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass 
and fern. It was fresh,  and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights died  down, 
and the glow of the trees faded; but outside  under  the arch they could see 
old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his arms raised above his head. The 
bright stars peered out of the sky, and lit the falling water as  it spilled 
on to his fingers  and head,  and  dripped, dripped, in  hundreds  of silver 
drops on to  his  feet. Listening to the tinkling of  the drops  the hobbits 
fell asleep. 
     They  woke to find a cool sun  shining into the great court, and on  to 
the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running on a stiff 

####-easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were 
bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard him humming and  singing, as he 
came up the path between the trees.  
     'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw 
them. 
'You  sleep long. I have  been many a hundred  strides already today. Now we 
will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.' 
     He  poured  them  out two  full bowls  from a  stone  jar;  but  from a  
different jar. The taste was not the same  as it  had been the night before: 
it was earthier and  richer, more sustaining and  food-like,  so  to  speak. 
While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of  the bed, and nibbling small 
pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a  necessary part 
of breakfast than  because they  felt  hungry), Treebeard stood,  humming in 
Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky. 
     'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask. 
     'Hoo, eh? Entmoot?' said Treebeard, turning round. 'It is not a  place, 
it  is a  gathering of Ents  --  which does not often happen nowadays.  But I 
have  managed  to make a fair number  promise to come.  We shall meet in the 
place  where we have always met: Derndingle  Men  call it.  It is away south 
from here. We must be there before noon.' 
     Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the  hobbits in his arms as 
on the previous day. At  the entrance to  the court he turned  to the right, 
stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along  the feet of great 
tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets 
of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods.  Soon 
Treebeard 
turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves,  where the 
trees were  larger, taller, and  thicker  than any that the hobbits had ever 
seen before. For a  while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they 
had  noticed when  they  first ventured into Fangorn,  but it  soon  passed. 
Treebeard  did   not  talk  to  them.  He   hummed  to  himself  deeply  and 
thoughtfully,  but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded  like 
boom, boom, rumboom, boorar, boom, boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar 
boom,  and 
so on with  a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought 
they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound, that seemed  to come out of 
the earth, or  from boughs above  their heads, or perhaps  from the boles of 

####-the trees; but Treebeard did not stop or turn his head to either side. 
     They had been going for a  long while  -- Pippin had tried to keep count 
of the 'ent-strides' but had failed, getting lost at about three thousand -- 
when  Treebeard  began to  slacken his pace. Suddenly he  stopped,  put  the 
hobbits down, and raised his curled  hands to his mouth so that they  made a  
hollow tube; then he blew or called through them. A great hoom, hom rang out 
like a deep-throated horn in the woods, and seemed  to echo  from the trees.  
Far off there came from  several directions  a similar  hoom, hom, hoom that 
was not an echo but an answer. 
     Treebeard  now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders  and strode on 
again, every now and then sending out another horn-call,  and each time  the 
answers came louder and nearer. In this way they came at last to what looked 
like an impenetrable  wall of dark evergreen trees, trees of a kind that the 
hobbits had never seen  before:  they branched out right from the roots, and 
were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly, and  they bore 
many stiff upright flower -spikes with large shining olive-coloured buds.  
     Turning to the  left and skirting this huge hedge  Treebeard  came in a  
few strides to a  narrow entrance. Through it a  worn path passed  and dived 
suddenly down  a long steep slope. The hobbits saw that they were descending 
into a great  dingle, almost as round as a bowl, very wide and deep, crowned  
at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge. It  was smooth and  grassclad 
inside,  and  there were no  trees  except  three  very tall  and  beautiful 
silver -birches that stood at the  bottom  of the bowl.  Two  other paths led 
down into the dingle: from the west and from the east. 
     Several Ents had already arrived.  More were coming  in down the  other  
paths, and  some were now following Treebeard. As they drew near the hobbits 
gazed  at them.  They had expected to see a number of creatures as much like 
Treebeard as  one hobbit is like another (at any  rate to a stranger's eye); 
and they were very much surprised to see nothing of the  kind. The Ents were 
as different from  one another as trees from trees: some as different as one 
tree  is  from  another of the  same  name  but  quite  different growth and 
history; and some as different  as one tree-kind from another, as birch from 
beech; oak from fir. There were a few older Ents,  bearded and gnarled  like 
hale  but  ancient trees (though none looked  as ancient as Treebeard);  and 
there   were  tall  strong  Ents,   clean-limbed  and  smooth-skinned   like 
forest -trees  in  their  prime; but  there were no young Ents, no  saplings. 
Altogether there were about two  dozen standing on the wide grassy  floor of 

####-the dingle, and as many more were marching in. 
     At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety  that they 
saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth; and height, and 
length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes  and fingers (anything from 
three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded 
them of beech-trees  or oaks. But  there were other kinds. Some recalled the 
chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick 
legs. Some recalled  the  ash:  tall straight grey  Ents  with many-fingered 
hands and long legs; some  the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch, 
the  rowan, and the linden.  But when the Ents all gather ed round Treebeard, 
bowing their  heads  slightly, murmuring in  their  slow musical voices, and 
looking long  and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw  that they 
were all of the same kindred, and all had  the same eyes: not all so old  or  
so  deep  as Treebeard's,  but  all  with the  same slow, steady, thoughtful 
expression, and the same green flicker. 
     As soon as the  whole company was assembled,  standing in a wide circle  
round  Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation began.  The Ents 
began to murmur slowly: first  one joined and then  another, until they were 
all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one 
side  of  the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom  on  the 
other  side. Though he could not catch or  understand any of the words  -- he 
supposed the language was Entish  -- Pippin found the  sound very pleasant to 
listen to at first;  but gradually his attention wavered.  After a long time 
(and the  chant showed no signs  of  sla ckening) he found himself wondering, 
since  Entish  was  such  an 'unhasty'  language,  whether they had yet  got 
further than Good Morning; and if  Treebeard  was to call the roll, how many 
days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for  
yes or no,' he thought. He yawned. 
     Treebeard  was immediately  aware  of him. 'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!' he 
said,  and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk,  I 
was forgetting; and anyway it is  wearisome listening to a speech you do not 
understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot, 
and 
they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and  that  a  
new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that 
is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry  can stroll about in the dingle, 
if you like.  There is  a well of  good water, if you  need refreshing, away 

####-yonder in the north bank.  There are still  some  words  to speak before the 
Moot really begins.  I will come  and see you again, and tell you how things 
are going.' 
     He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed  low. This 
feat  seemed  to amuse  the Ents very much, to judge by the  tone  of  their 
murmurs, and the flicker of their  eyes; but they soon turned  back to their 
own  business. Merry  and Pippin  climbed up the path that came in from  the 
west, and looked  through the opening in the  great  hedge.  Long  tree-clad 
slopes  rose  from  the  lip of  the dingle, and away beyond them, above the 
fir-trees of the furthest  ridge there rose, sharp and white, the peak of  a  
high  mountain.  Southwards to their left they could see the forest  falling 
away  down  into  the  grey distance. There far  away there was a pale green 
glimmer that Merry guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan. 
     'I wonder where Isengard is?' said Pippin. 
     'I  don't  know quite where  we are,'  said  Merry;  'but that peak  is 
probably Methedras. and as far  as I can remember the  ring of Isengard lies 
in a  fork or deep cleft  at the end of the  mountains. It  is probably down 
behind this  great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze over there, left 
of the peak, don't you think?' 
     'What  is Isengard like?' said Pippin. 'I wonder what Ents can do a bout 
it anyway.'  'So do I,' said Merry.  'Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or  
hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock  in 
the  middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has  a tower  on  it. There  is a gate, 
perhaps  more  than   one, in the encircling wall,  and I  believe there is a  
stream running  through it; it  comes  out  of  the  mountains, and flows on 
across the Gap  of  Rohan. It does not seem the  sort  of place for  Ents to 
tackle.  But I  have an odd feeling  about these Ents: somehow I don't think  
they are quite as safe and, well funny as  they seem. They seem slow, queer, 
and  patient, almost  sad; and yet I believe  they could  be roused.  If that 
happened, I would rather not be on the other side.' 
     'Yes!' said  Pippin.  'I  know  what you mean.  There might be  all the 
difference between an old cow sitting and  thoughtfully chewing, and a  bull  
charging; and the change might come  suddenly.  I wonder  if  Treebeard will 
rouse them. I am sure he means to  try.  Bu t they don't like  being  roused. 
Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.' 
     The hobbits turned back.  The voices of the Ents were still  rising and 
falling in their  conclave. The sun had now risen high  enough to look  over 

####-the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of  the birches and lit the northward 
side of the  dingle  with  a  cool yellow  light.  There they  saw  a little 
glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet 
of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again, 
and  not to  be in a hurry-and then they climbed down  to the gushing water.  
They drank a little,  a clean, cold, sharp  draught, and sat down on a mossy 
stone,  watching the  patches of  sun  on the grass and the shadows  of  the 
sailing clouds passing over the  floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents 
went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and 
far from everything  that had ever  happened  to  them. A great longing  came 
over them for the faces and voices of their companions. especially for Frodo 
and Sam, and for Strider. 
     At last there came  a pause in the  Ent-voices; and looking up they saw 
Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side. 
     'Hm, hoom, here I am again,' said Treebeard. 'Are you getting weary, or 
feeling  impatient,  hmm,  eh? Well, I  am  afraid  that  you  must  not get 
impatient yet. We have finished the first stage now; but I have still got to 
explain things again to those that live a  long  way off, far from Isengard, 
and those that I could not get round to before the Moot, and  after that  we 
shall have to decide  what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take 
Ents so  long as going over all the facts  and events that  they have to make 
up their  minds  about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long 
time yet: a couple of  days very likely. So I  have brought you a companion.  
He  has an ent-house nearby.  Bregalad  is his  Elvish name. He says  he has 
already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he 
is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought  to get on together. 
Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them. 
     Bregalad  stood for some  time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they  
looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was 
tall, and seemed to be one of the  younger Ents;  he had smooth shining skin 
on  his arms and legs; his lips  were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He 
could bend and  sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last  he spoke, and 
his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's.  
     'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go  for a walk!' he said. 'I  am Bregalad, 
that  is Quickbeam in your language. But it is on ly  a  nickname, of course. 
They have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent before he had 
finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still 

####-wetting their beards. Come with me!' 
     He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long -fingered hand to  each 
of  the hobbits. All that day  they  walked  about in  the  woods with  him, 
singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam  often  laughed. He laughed if the  sun 
came out from  behind  a cloud, he laughed  if  they came upon a  stream  or  
spring: then  he stooped  and  splashed  his  feet  and head with water;  he 
laughed sometimes  at some sound or whisper in  the trees. Whenever he saw a  
rowan-tree he halted a  while  with  his  arms stretched out,  and sang, and 
swayed as he sang. 
     At  nightfall  he  brought  them to his ent-house:  nothing more than a  
mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew in a circle 
about it, and there was water  (as in all ent-houses), a spring bubbling out 
from the bank. They  talked for a while as darkness fell on  the forest. Not 
far away  the voices of  the Entmoot  could be heard still going on; but now 
they seemed deeper and less  leisurely,  and every  now  and again one great 
voice would rise in a high and  quickening music,  while all the others died 
away.  But beside them Bregalad  spoke gently  in their  own  tongue, almost 
whispering; and they learned that  he belonged to Skinbark's people, and the  
country where they had lived had been ravaged. That  seemed  to the  hobbits 
quite enough to explain his 'hastiness', at least in the matter of Orcs. 
     'There were rowan-trees in my home,'  said Bregalad,  softly and sadly, 
'rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many years ago in the 
quiet of the  world. The  oldest were planted by the Ents to try  and please 
the Entwives;  but  they looked at them and smiled and  said  that they knew 
where  whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing. Yet there are no  trees 
of all  that race, the people of the Rose, that are  so beautiful to me. And 
these trees grew and grew, till the  shadow of each  was like a  green hall, 
and  their red  berries in the  autumn  were  a burden,  and a beauty  and a  
wonder. Birds used to flock there. I like birds, even when they chatter; and 
the  rowan has enough  and  to  spare. But  the birds became  unfriendly and 
greedy  and tore at the trees, and threw  the fruit down and did not eat it. 
Then  Orcs came  with axes and cut down my trees. I came  and called them by 
their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear or answer: they 
lay dead. 
     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! 
     O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay! 
     O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer's day, 

####-     Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft: 
     Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft! 
     O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey; 
     Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day. 
     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! 
     The hobbits  fell asleep to the sound of  the soft singing of Bregalad, 
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved. 
     The next day they spent also in his company,  but they  did not  go far 
from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter  of the 
bank; for  the wind was colder, and  the clouds closer and greyer; there was 
little sunshine,  and in the  distance the voices  of  the Ents at the  Moot 
still  rose  and  fell, sometimes  loud  and strong, sometimes low  and sad, 
sometimes  quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge. A  second night 
came and  still  the  Ents  held conclave under hurrying  clouds  and fitful 
stars. 
     The third day broke, bleak and windy.   At sunrise the Ents' voices rose 
to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind 
fell  and  the  air grew  heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could  see that 
Bregalad  was now listening intently, although to them,  down in the dell of 
his ent-house, the sound of the Moot was faint. 
     The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains. sent 
out  long  yellow beams  between the  cracks  and  fissures of  the  clouds.  
Suddenly they were aware  that  everything wa s very quiet; the  whole forest  
stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent -voices had stopped.  What did 
that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards 
towards Derndingle. 
     Then with  a crash came  a great ringing shou t:  ra-hoom-rah! The trees 
quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was another pause, and 
then a  marching  music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats 
and booms there welled voices singing high and strong. 
     We come, we come with roll of drum: ta -runda runda runda rom! 
     The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song: 
     We come, we come with horn and drum: ta -ryna ryna ryna rom! 
     Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house. 
     Before  long  they  saw the  marching  line approaching: the Ents  were 
swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. Treebeard was 
at  their head,  and  some  fifty followers  were  behind him,  two abreast, 

####-keeping step with their feet  and beating time  with  their hands upon their 
flanks. As they drew near the flash and flicker of their eyes could be seen. 
     'Hoom, hom! Here we  come with a  boom, here  we come at last!'  called  
Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad  and the hobbits. 'Come, join the 
Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!' 
     'To Isengard!' the Ents cried in many voices.  
     'To Isengard!' 
     To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone; 
     Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, 
     We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door; 
     For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars -- we go to war! 
     To land of gloom with tramp  of doom, with  roll  of drum, we come,  we  
come; 
     To Isengard with doom we come! 
     With doom we come, with doom we come! 
     So they sang as they marched southwards. 
     Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into  the  line beside Treebeard. The 
old Ent  now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders again, and 
so they rode proudly at the head of  the sin ng  company with beating hearts 
and heads held high. Though they ad expected something to happen eventually, 
they were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as 
sudden  as the bursting of a flood that had long been held back by a dike. 
     'The Ents made up  their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they?' 
Pippin  ventured to  say  after  some time, when  for a  moment  the singing 
paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard. 
     'Quickly?' said Treebeard. 'Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected. 
Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an age. We Ents do not 
like being roused; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our 
trees  and our  lives  are in  great  danger. That has not happened  in this 
Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea.  It is the orc-work, 
the wanton hewing  -- rbrum --  without even the  bad excuse of  feeding the 
fires, that has so angered us; and the  treachery of a neighbour, who should 
have helped us. Wizards ought to know better: they do know  better. There is 
no curse in  Elvish, Entish, or  the  tongues  of Men bad  enough  for  such 
treachery. Down with Saruman!' 
     'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?' asked Merry. 
     'Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps. how strong 

####-we are. Maybe you have heard  of Trolls? They  are mighty strong. But Trolls 
are only counterfeits. made by the  Enemy in the Great  Darkness, in mockery 
of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls.  We are made of 
the  bones  of  the earth. We can split stone like  the roots of trees, only 
quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused!  If we  are not hewn down, or  
destroyed  by  fire  or blast  of  sorcery,  we could  split  Isengard  into 
splinters and crack its walls into rubble.' 
     'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?' 
     'Hm,  ah, yes, that is so. I  have  not  forgotten  it.  Indeed  I have 
thought long about it. But. you see, many of the Ents are younger than I am.  
by many lives of trees. They  are all  roused now. and  their mind is all on  
one  thing: breaking Isengard.  But they will  start  thinking  again before 
long; they  will  cool down a little.  when we take our evening drink. What a  
thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to 
go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.' 
     Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a  while.  But after a  
time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that 
his old  brow was wrinkled and  knotted.  At  last he  looked up, and Pippin 
could see a sad look in his eyes,  sad but not unhappy. There was a light in 
them, as if   the green  flame had  sunk deeper into the  dark  wells of  his 
thought. 
     'Of course, it  is likely  enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely 
enough that we are going to  our doom: the last march of the Ents. But if we 
stayed at home  and did noth ing, doom would find us anyway, sooner or later. 
That thought has long been  growing in our hearts;  and that is  why we  are 
marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the 
Ents may  be worth a song.  Aye,'  he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples 
before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the  songs come  true 
about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to  see Fimbrethil again. But 
there, my friends, songs  like trees bear fruit  only  in their own time and 
their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.' 
     The Ents  went  striding  on at a great pace. They had descended into a  
long fold of the land that fell away southward;  now they began to climb up,  
and up, on to the high western  ridge. The woods fell  away and they came to 
scattered groups of birch, and  then  to bare slopes where only  a few gaunt 
pine-trees grew. The sun  sank behind the dark hill -back in front. Grey dusk  
fell. 

####-     Pippin looked behind. The number of  the Ents had grown -- or  what was 
happening? Where  the dim bare  slopes that  they had crossed should lie, he 
thought he saw groves of trees. But they were  moving! Could it be  that the 
trees of  Fangorn  were awake, and the  forest was rising, marching over the 
hills to war? He rubbed his  eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived 
him; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward. There was a noise like 
wind  in many branches. The Ents were  drawing  near the  crest of the ridge 
now, and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing was 
to be  heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the  feet of the Ents,  
and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of  many  drifting  leaves. At  last  
they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a dark pit: the great cleft  
at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunnr, the Valley of Saruman. 
     'Night lies over Isengard,' said Treebeard. 
 
