 

 
 
     When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.  
He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning br ightly. His 
three companions were bending  over  him.  'What has happened? Where is  the 
pale  king?' he  asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to  hear him speak to  
answer  for  a  while; nor did they  understand  his question.  At length he 
gathered from  Sam that they had seen nothing  but the vague shadowy  shapes 
coming towards them.  Suddenly to his  horror Sam found  that his master had 
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He 
heard  Frodo's  voice, but it seemed to  come from a great distance, or from 
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they  
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as  if  dead,  face downwards  on the 
grass  with his sword  beneath  him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and 
lay  him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now  a  good while 
ago. 
     Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while  
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out  of the  shadows. They 
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down 
swiftly at his side. 
     'I  am not a Black  Rider,  Sam,' he said  gently, 'nor in league  with 
them. I  have been  trying to discover  something of  their movements; but I 
have  found nothing. I cannot  think  why  they have gone and do  not attack  
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.' 
     When he heard what Frodo had  to tell, he became full  of concern,  and 
shook his head  and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much 
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with  it. 
'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up and 
walked  away, and called  Sam to him.  'I think I  understand  things better 
now,' he said in  a low voice.  'There  seem only to  have  been five of the 
enemy. Why they were not all here,  I  don't know;  but I  don't  think they 
expected to  be resisted.  They have drawn off for the  time being. But  not 
far,  I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape.  They 
are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that   their  purpose  is  almost  
accomplished, and that the  Ring  cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that 

####-they believe  your  master has a deadly  wound that will subdue him to their  
will. We  shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't  despair!' said Strider. 
'You  must trust  me  now. Your  Frodo is made of sterner  stuff  than I had 
guessed, though Gandalf  hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and 
I think he will  resist the evil power of the wound longer  than his enemies 
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am 
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. 
     Frodo  dozed, though the  pain  of his wound was slowly growing,  and a  
deadly  chill  was spreading  from  his  shoulder to  his arm  and side. His 
friends watched  over him, warming him,  and bathing  his  wound.  The night 
passed  slowly  and wearily.  Dawn was growing in the sky, and the  dell was 
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned. 
     'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the  ground a black cloak 
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there 
was a slash. 'This was  the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurt 
that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but  all blades perish 
that pierce  that  dreadful  King.  More  deadly  to  him  was  the name  of 
Elbereth.' 
     'And  more  deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a  
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw 
that near the end  its edge was notched and  the  point was broken  off. But 
even as he  held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for  
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only  
the hilt in  Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he  cried. 'It was this accursed  knife 
that gave the wound. Few now have the  skill in  healing to match  such evil  
weapons. But I will do what I can.' 
     He sat down on the  ground, and taking  the dagger -hilt laid it  on his 
knees, and he  sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it 
aside, he turned to Frodo  and in  a soft tone  spoke words the others could 
not catch.  From  the pouch at  his  belt he drew  out the  long leaves of a  
plant. 
     'These  leaves,' he said, 'I have  walked far to  find; for  this plant 
does not grow in the bare hills;  but in the thickets away south of the Road 
I found it in the  dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his 
fingers,  and it gave out  a  sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It  is fortunate 
that  I could find it, for it is  a healing plant that the  Men of  the West 
brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they  named it,  and it grows  now sparsely 

####-and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old;  and it is not known 
in the  North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It  has great 
virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.' 
     He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The 
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their 
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had  also some  power over the wound, for  
Frodo felt the pain   and also the  sense of  frozen cold lessen in his side; 
but the life did not return to his arm, and  he could not  raise or  use his 
hand.  He  bitterly  regretted his  foolishness, and reproached himself  for  
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed 
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he 
would  remain maimed for  life,  and how they would now  manage to  continue 
their journey. He fell too weak to stand. 
     The others were discussing this very question. They  quickly decided to 
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the 
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, 
then he  must have been forced to ride away, and  he will not return. In any 
case we are in great peril here after  dark, since the attack of last night, 
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.' 
     As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full, they had some hurried food  and 
packed. It was impossible for Frodo  to  walk, so  they divided the  greater  
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo  on the pony. In 
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed 
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an a ffection for its new masters, 
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must  have been very hard for the 
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life. 
     They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the 
Road,  but. it was the  quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed 
fuel; for Strider said  that Frodo must be kept warm,  especially at  night, 
while fire would be some protection  for them all. It  was also his  plan to 
shorten their journey by cutting  across another great loop of the Road: east  
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards. 
     They made  their  way slowly  and  cautiously  round the  south-western 
slopes  of the  hill, and came in a  little while to the  edge of the  Road. 
There was no sign of the Riders. But  even as they were hurrying across they 
heard far away two  cries: a cold voice calling and  a cold voice answering. 
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The 

####-land before them  sloped  away  southwards, but  it was  wild  and pathless; 
bushes and  stunted trees  grew in dense patches with wide barren  spaces in 
between.  The grass was scanty, coarse,  and grey;  and  the leaves  in  the 
thickets were faded and falling. It was  a cheerless land, and their journey 
was slow and gloomy. They spoke  little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart 
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down, 
and 
their  backs bowed  under  their  burdens.  Even  Strider  seemed  tired and 
heavy-hearted. 
     Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again, 
but he did not speak of it for  a long time. Four  days passed,  without the 
ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop 
slowly 
sank,  and  before  them the distant mountains loomed a  little nearer.  Yet 
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked 
their  flight or followed them.  They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch 
in pairs by night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the 
grey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled  moon; but they  saw nothing,  and 
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once  did they 
feel the sense of present  evil that  had assailed them before the attack in 
the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already  lost their 
trail again. Perhaps  they  were waiting  to  make  some ambush in  a narrow 
place? 
     At the end of  the fifth day the ground began once more  to rise slowly 
out of the wide  shallow valley into which  they had  descended. Strider now  
turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached 
the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far  ahead a huddle of wooded 
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round  the  feet  of 
the hills;  and  to  their  right  a  grey river  gleamed  pale in the  thin 
sunshine. In the  distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley 
half-veiled in mist. 
     "I am  afraid we must  go back  to  the Road  here for  a while,'  said 
Strider.  'We have  now  come to  the  River Hoarwell,  that the Elves  call 
Mitheithel. It  flows down out  of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells  north of 
Rivendell,  and joins  the Loudwater away in the  South.  Some  call  it the 
Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the  Sea. There is 
no way over  it  below  its sources  in the Ettenmoors, except by  the  Last  

####-Bridge on which the Road crosses.' 
     'What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry. 
     'That is Loudwater,  the Bruinen of Rivendell,'  answered Strider. 'The 
Road runs along the edge of  the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the 
Ford of Bruinen. But I have  not yet thought how  we shall cross that water. 
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last  
Bridge held against us.' 
     Next day, early in  the morning, they came down again to the borders of 
the Road.  Sam  and  Strider  went  forward, but they found no  sign of  any 
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some 
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away 
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see. 
     They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile 
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope. 
They dreaded  to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider 
made them take cover  in a  thicket at  the side of the Road, while  he went 
forward to explore. 
     Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he 
said,  'and I wonder very much what that  means. But  I have found something 
very strange.' 
     He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it 
in  the  mud in  the  middle of the  Bridge,' he said. 'It  is  a beryl,  an 
elf-stone.  Whether it was set  there, or  let fall by chance, I cannot say; 
but  it brings  hope to  me. I will take it as a sign that we may  pass  the 
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep  to  the Road, without some  clearer  
token.' 
     At once they went on again. They crossed  the Bridge in safety, hearing 
no sound  but  the water  swirling  against its three great  arches. A  mile 
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the 
steep  lands  on  the left of the Road.  Here Strider turned aside, and soon 
they were lost in a sombre  country of dark trees winding among the feet  of 
sullen hills. 
     The hobbits were glad  to leave  the  cheerless lands and the  perilous 
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As 
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here  and  there  upon 
heights  and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls  of stone, and the 
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo,  who was  not walking, had 

####-time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his  journey 
and the  threatening towers on  the hills north of  the Road, in the country 
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had  happened. Frodo 
guessed that they were  now in the  same  region, and wondered if by  chance 
they would pass near the spot. 
     'Who lives  in this land?'  he asked.  'And  who built these  towers? Is 
this troll-country?' 
     'No!' said Strider. 'Trolls do  not  build. No one lives in  this land. 
Men once dwelt  here, ages ago;  but  none remain  now. They  became an evil 
people, as legends  tell, for they fell under  the shadow of Angmar. But all 
were destroyed  in the war that  brought the North Kingdom to  its  end. But 
that is now so long ago that the hills  have forgotten them, though a shadow  
still lies on the land.' 
     'Where  did you learn  such  tales,  if  all  the  land  is  empty  and 
forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The  birds and beasts do not tell tales of that 
son.' 
     'The  heirs  of Elendil do not forget all  things past,'  said Strider; 
'and  many more things than  I can tell are remembered in  Rivendell.'  'Have  
you often  been to Rivendell?' said  Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt 
there once, and still I return when I may. 
     There my heart is;  but  it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the 
fair house of Elrond.' 
     The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to  
the River Bruinen, but both were  now hidden  from view. The travellers came 
into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark  and silent.  Trees with old 
and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes 
of pine-wood. 
     The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick 
their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled 
rocks. As long as they could they avoided  climbing  for  Frodo's  sake, and 
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales.  
They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The wind 
began  to blow steadily  out  of  the West and pour the water of the distant 
seas  on the  dark  heads of the hills in fine  drenching rain. By nightfall 
they  were all soaked,  and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get 
any  fire  to burn. The next  day the  hills rose still  higher  and steeper  
before  them, and  they were forced to  turn away  northwards out  of  their 

####-course. Strider seemed to  be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out 
from Weathertop, and their stock of  provisions was beginning to run low. It  
went on raining. 
     That night they camped on  a stony shelf with a rock -wall  behind them, 
in which  there was a shallow cave,  a  mere scoop in the  cliff.  Frodo was 
restless. The  cold and wet had  made his wound more painful  than ever, and 
the ache and sense of deadly chill took  away all sleep.  He lay tossing and 
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks 
of  rock, water  dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling  fall of  a loosened 
stone. He felt that black shapes  were advancing to smother him; but when he 
sat up he saw  nothing but  the back of  Strider  sitting hunched up, smoking 
his pipe, and watching.  He lay down again and passed into an uneasy  dream, 
in  which he  walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire,  but it seemed 
faint  and dim, less clear  than the  tall black shadows that  stood looking 
over the hedge. 
     In  the morning he  woke to  find that the rain had stopped. The clouds 
were still thick,  but they were breaking, and pale strips of  blue appeared 
between them.  The  wind was  shifting  again.  They  did  not start  early.  
Immediately after  their cold  and  comfortless  breakfast Strider  went off 
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he 
came  back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie 
of the land. 
     When  he returned he was not reassuring.  'We have come too  far to the 
north,' he said, 'and we must find  some way to  turn back southwards again.  
If we  keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north 
of  Rivendell.  That is  troll -country,  and  little known  to  me. We could 
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but 
it would take  too long,  for I  do not know the way, and our food would not  
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.' 
     The  rest of that day they  spent  scrambling over  rocky  ground. They 
found  a passage between  two  hills that  led them into  a  valley  running 
south-east, the  direction that they wished  to take; but towards the end of 
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark 
edge  against  the  sky was  broken  into many bare points like teeth  of  a  
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it. 
     They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before 
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so  they 

####-often  despaired of  getting their pony up, or  indeed of finding a path for  
themselves, burdened as  they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were 
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They  had climbed on to  a  
narrow  saddle  between two  higher points, and the  land fell  steeply away 
again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the 
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder  felt 
as if icy claws were  laid upon them.  The trees  and rocks about him seemed 
shadowy and dim. 
     'We  cannot go any further,' said  Merry to Strider. 'I am  afraid this 
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully  anxious about him. What are we 
to do? Do you think they  will be able to cure him in Rivendell,  if we ever 
get there?' 
     'We shall see,'  answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do 
in  the  wilderness;  and  it is chiefly because of  his wound that I am  so 
anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.' 
     'What is the matter with my  master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking 
appealingly  at Strider.  'His  wound was small, and it is  already  closed. 
There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.' 
     'Frodo  has been  touched  by the weapons of  the Enemy,' said Strider, 
'and there is some poison  or evil at work that is beyond my  skill to drive 
out. But do not give up hope, Sam!' 
     Night was cold up on the  high ridge. They lit a small fire  down under 
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as 
if stone had once been  quarried there. They sat  huddled together. The wind 
blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning 
and  sighing.  Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark  wings 
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that  sought 
him in all the hollows of the hills.  
     The  morning dawned bright  and fair; the air  was clean, and the light 
pale and clear  in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey 
longed for the  sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, 
Strider took Merry  with him and went to survey the country from  the height 
to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining  brightly when he 
returned  with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the 
right direction. If they went on, down the  further side of the ridge,  they 
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way  ahead Strider had caught a  
glimpse  of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from 

####-view, the Road to the  Ford was not far from the River  and  lay on the side 
nearest to them. 
     'We must make for  the  Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a  
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only 
way to the Ford.' 
     As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed  slowly down 
the southern side  of the ridge; but the way  was much easier  than they had 
expected, for the slope  was  far less steep on  this side, and before  long 
Frodo was able  to  ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an 
unexpected talent  for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many 
jolts as possible. The  spirits of the  party  rose  again. Even  Frodo felt 
better in  the  morning  light, but every  now  and again  a mist seemed  to 
obscure his sight, and he pa ssed his hands over his eyes.  
     Pippin was a little  ahead of the  others. Suddenly he turned round and 
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried. 
     When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake: 
     there were clearly  the beginnings of  a  path, that climbed  with many 
windings  out of  the woods  below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In 
places it was  now faint and overgrown,  or choked  with fallen  stones  and 
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used.  It was a path made 
by strong arms  and heavy feet. Here and  there old trees  had  been cut  or  
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way. 
     They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest  
way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came 
into the dark  woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming 
out  of a belt of fir-trees  it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply 
to the left round the comer  of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came 
to the comer they  looked round and  saw  that the path ran on  over a level 
strip  under the face of a low  cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall 
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. 
     Outside the door they all  halted. There was  a  cave  or  rock -chamber  
behind, but  in the gloom  inside nothing  could be  seen. Strider, Sam, and 
Merry  pushing with all  their  strength managed  to open  the door a little 
wider, and then Strider  and Merry  went in. They did not go far, for on the 
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen  near the entrance 
except some great empty jars and broken pots. 
     'Surely  this  is a troll-hole, if ever there  was one!'  said  Pippin. 

####-'Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know  who made the path  -
and 
we had better get off it quick.' 
     'There  is  no  need, I think,'  said  Strider,  coining  out.  'It  is 
certainly a troll-hole,  but it seems  to have  been  long forsaken. I don't 
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.' 
     The  path  went on again from the door, and turning to the right  again 
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking 
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead  with Merry. Sam and 
Strider came behind, one on each side of  Frodo's pony, for the path was now 
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone 
very far  before Pippin came  running back,  fol lowed  by Merry.  They  both 
looked terrified. 
     'There are trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods not 
far below. We  got a sight of them  through  the tree-trunks.  They are very 
large!' 
     'We  will come and  look at them,' said  Strider,  picking  up a stick. 
Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared. 
     The  sun was now  high, and  it  shone  down through the  half-stripped 
branches of  the  trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of  light. 
They halted  suddenly  on the  edge,  and  peered  through the  tree-trunks, 
holding their breath. There stood  the trolls: three large  trolls.  One was 
stooping, and the other two stood staring at him. 
     Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and 
brok e his stick upon the stooping troll. 
     Nothing happened. There  was a  gasp  of astonishment from the hobbits,  
and then even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said.  'We are forgetting our family 
history!  These  must  be the  very  three  that  were  caught  by  Gandalf,  
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.' 
     'I had no  idea we were  anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew 
the  story well. Bilbo  and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact 
he had  never mor e than half believed  it. Even now he  looked  at the stone 
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them 
to life again. 
     'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew 
about  trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with  a bright sun,  and 
yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale  of live trolls waiting for  

####-us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an 
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament  for a  
live troll!' 
     They  all laughed.  Frodo felt  his spirits  reviving: the reminder  of 
Bilbo's  first successful adventure  was  heartening. The sun, too, was warm 
and comforting, and the mist before his  eyes seemed to be lifting a little. 
They rested for some time in the glade,  and took  their  mid-day meal right 
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs. 
     'Won't somebody give  us  a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said 
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't ha d a song or a tale for days.' 
     'Not since  Weathertop,' said Frodo. The  others looked at him.  'Don't  
worry about me!' he added. 'I  feel much  better, but I  don't think I could 
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.' 
     'Come on,  Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more  stored in your head than you  
let on about.' 
     'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't  
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But 
these old images here  brought it to my mind.' Standing  up,  with his hands 
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. 
     Troll sat alone on his seat of stone, 
     And munched and mumbled a bare old bone; 
     For many a year he had gnawed it near, 
     For meat was hard to come by. 
     Done by! Gum by! 
     In a case in the hills he dwelt alone, 
     And meat was hard to come by. 
 
     Up came Tom with his big boots on. 
     Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon? 
     For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim, 
     As should be a -lyin' in graveyard. 
     Caveyard! Paveyard! 
     This many a year has Tim been gone, 
     And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard.' 
 
     'My lad,' said Troll, 'this bone I stole. 
     But what be bones that lie in a  hole? 

####-     Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead, 
     Afore I found his shinbone. 
     Tinbone! Thinbone! 
     He can spare a share for a poor old troll, 
     For he don't need his shinbone.' 
 
     Said Tom: 'I don't see why the likes o' thee 
     Without axin' leave should go makin' free 
     With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin; 
     So hand the old bone over! 
     Rover! Trover! 
     Though dead he be, it belongs to he; 
     So hand the old bone over!'  
 
     'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins, 
     'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins. 
     A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet! 
     I'll try my teeth on thee now.  
     Hee now! See now! 
     I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins; 
     I've a mind to dine on thee now.' 
 
     But just as he thought his dinner was caught, 
     He found his hands had hold of naught. 
     Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind 
     And gave him the boot to larn him. 
     Warn him! Darn him! 
     A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought, 
     Would be the way to larn him. 
 
     But harder than stone is the flesh and bone 
     Of a troll that sits in the hills alone. 
     As well set your boot to the mountain's root, 
     For the seat of a troll don't feel it. 
     Peel it! Heal it! 
     Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan, 
     And he knew his toes could feel it. 

####- 
     Tom's leg is game, since home he came, 
     And his bootless foot is lasting lame; 
     But Troll don't care, and he's still there 
     With the bone he boned from its owner. 
     Doner! Boner! 
     Troll's old seat is still the same, 
     And the bone he boned from its owner! 
     'Well, that's a warning to  us all!' laughed Merry. 'It  is as well you  
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!' 
     'Where did you come  by  tha t, Sam?' asked Pippin.  'I've  never  heard 
those words before.' 
     Sam  muttered  something  inaudible. 'It's  out of  his  own  head,  of 
course,'  said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.  
First he was a conspirator, now he's a  jester.  He'll end up  by becoming a  
wizard - or a warrior!' 
     'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!' 
     In  the afternoon  they went  on  down  the  woods. They were  probably 
following the very track  that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many 
years before.  After a  few miles they came  out on the top  of a high  bank  
above the  Road. At this point  the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in 
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and 
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford 
and 
the  Mountains.  Not far  down the bank Strider pointed out a  stone in  the 
grass.  On  it roughly  cut  and  now  much weathered  could  still be  seen 
dwarf-runes and secret marks. 
     'There!' said  Merry.  'That  must be the stone  that marked  the place 
where the  trolls' gold  was  hidden.  How much is  left of Bilbo's share, I 
wonder, Frodo?' 
     Frodo looked at the stone,  and wished that  Bilbo had brought home  no 
treasure more perilous, nor  less easy to pan with. 'None  at all,' he said. 
'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it 
came from robbers.' 
     The Road lay quiet under the long  shadows of early  evening. There was 
no sign of any  other  travellers  to be  seen. As  there  was now no  other  
possible course for them to  take,  they climbed down  the bank, and turning 

####-left went off  as  fast as they could.  Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off 
the  light  of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to  meet them 
from the mountains ahead. 
     They were beginning  to look out  for a place  off the Road, where they 
could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that  brought  sudden fear 
back  into their hearts: the  noise of  hoofs behind them. They looked back, 
but they could not see far because of  the many windings and rollings of the  
Road. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into 
the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, u ntil they came 
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels.  As they peered out from among the 
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and  grey in  the failing light, some 
thirty feel  below them. The sound of hoofs  drew  nearer.  They were  going  
fast, with a light clippety-clippely-clip. Then faintly,  as if it was blown 
away from  them by the breeze,  they seemed  to catch a dim  ringing, as  of 
small bells tinkling. 
     'That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening 
intently. The  other  hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,  but they all 
remained  full of suspicion.  They had been in  fear of pursuit for  so long 
that any sound from  behind seemed ominous and  unfriendly. But Strider  was 
now leaning forward, stooped to the  ground, with a  hand to  his ear, and a  
look of joy on his face. 
     The light faded, and  the leaves on the bushes  rustled softly. Clearer  
and nearer  now the bells jingled, and clippety -clip  came the quick trotting 
feet. Suddenly into view below came a white  horse, gleaming in the shadows,  
running swiftly. In the dusk its  headstall flickered and flashed,  as if it 
were studded with gems  like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind 
him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in  the 
wind of his  speed. To  Frodo it  appeared  that a  white  light was shining 
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. 
     Strider sprang from hiding and  dashed  down  towards the Road, leaping 
with a cry through  the heather; but even before he  had moved or called, the 
rider  had  reined in  his horse and halted, looking  up towards the thicket 
where  they stood. When he saw  Strider, he dismounted and  ran to meet  him 
calling out: Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen! His speech and clear 
ringing 
voice left no doubt in their hearts:  the rider  was  of the Elven-folk.  No 
others that dwelt in the wide  world had voices so  fair  to hear. But there 

####-seemed to be  a note of haste or fear  in his call, and they saw tha t he was 
now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider. 
     Soon Strider  beckoned  to them,  and  the hobbits left  the bushes and 
hurried  down  to the Road. 'This is  Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of 
Elrond,' said Strider. 
     'Hail, and well met  at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I  was sent 
from  Rivendell to look  for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the 
road.' 
     'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully. 
     'No.  He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered 
Glorfindel.  'Elrond received news that  troubled him.  Some of my  kindred,  
journeying  in  your land  beyond the  Baranduin,* learned  that things were 
amiss, and sent  messages as swiftly as they could. They  said that the Nine 
were abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray bearing a  great  burden  without 
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that 
can ride openly  against  the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond  sent out 
north,  west, and south.  It was thought  that you  might  turn far aside to 
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.  
     'It  was  my  lot  to  take the Road,  and  I  came to  the  Bridge  of 
Mitheithel, and  left a  token  there, nigh  on seven days ago. Three of the 
servants of  Sauron were upon the  Bridge, but  they withdrew  and I pursued 
them westward. I came also  upon two others, but they turned away southward. 
Since then I have  searched  for your  trail. Two days  ago I found  it, and 
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the 
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here 
we must  risk the peril of  the Road and go. There  are five behind us,  and 
when  they find your trail upon the Road  they will   ride after us  like the 
wind.  And they are not all. Where the  other four may be, I  do not know. I 
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.' 
     While Glorfindel was speaking  the  shades of evening  deepened.  Frodo 
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever  since the sun began to  sink the 
mist before his eyes had  darkened,  and he  felt  that a  shadow was coming 
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt  
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm. 
     'My master  is  sick and  wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He  can't go  on 
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.' 
     Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently 

####-in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety. 
     Briefly Strider told of the attack  on their camp under Weathertop, and 
of  the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it 
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he  took  it, but he looked  intently at 
it. 
     'There  are evil things written  on  this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe 
your  eyes  cannot see  them.  Keep it, Aragorn,  till we reach the house of 
Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of 
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can -  but all the 
more do I urge you now to go on without rest.' 
     He searched the  wound on Frodo's shoulder with  his  fingers, and  his 
face grew graver, as  if what he learned disquieted  him. But Frodo felt the 
chill lessen in  his  side  and arm;  a little  warmth crept  down from  his 
shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The  dusk of evening  seemed  
to grow lighter  about him, as if  a cloud  had been  withdrawn.  He saw his  
friends'  faces more clearly  again, and a  measure of new hope and strength 
returned. 
     'You  shall  ride my  horse,'  said  Glorfindel.  'I will  shorten  the 
stirrups  up to the saddle-skins, and  you must sit as tight as you can. But 
you need not fear: my horse  will not let any rider  fall that I command him 
to bear. His pace is light and smooth;  and if  danger presses  too near, he 
will  bear  you away with a  speed that even  the black steeds of  the enemy 
cannot rival.' 
     'No, he will not!' said  Frodo. 'I  shall  not ride him, if I am to  be 
carried off  to  Rivendell  or anywhere else, leaving  my friends behind  in 
danger.' 
     Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would 
be  in danger if you were  not  with them! The pursuit  would follow you and 
leave  us in  peace, I  think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that 
brings us all in peril.' 
     To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's 
white  horse.  The pony  was laden instead with a great part  of the others' 
burdens, so that they   now marched lighter, and  for a time made good speed; 
but the hobbits  began  to find it hard to keep up  with the swift  tireless 
feet of the Elf.  On he led them, into the  mouth of darkness,  and still on 
under the deep clouded night. There was neither  star nor moon. Not until the  
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were  by that 

####-time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and  even Strider seemed  by the  
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream. 
     They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards  from the 
road-side,  and  fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to  have closed 
their eyes when Glorfindel, who  had set himself to watch  while they slept, 
awoke  them again.  The sun had  now climbed far into the  morning, and  the 
clouds and mists of the night were gone. 
     'Drink  this!'  said  Glorfindel  to  them, pouring for  each in turn a  
little liquor from his silver -studded flask  of leather.  It  was  clear  as 
spring  water and  had no taste, and it did not feel either  cool or warm in 
the mouth; but  strength  and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs  as 
they  drank  it. Eaten after that draught the stale  bread  and dried  fruit 
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better  
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. 
     They had rested rather less than five hours when they  took to the Road 
again. Glorfindel  still  urged them  on, and  only allowed two brief  halts 
during the day's  march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before 
nightfall, and  came  to  a  point where the Road bent  right  and  ran down 
towards the  bottom of the valley,  now making  straight for the Bruinen. So  
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or  
hear; but often  Glorfindel would  halt and  listen  for  a moment, if  they 
lagged behind,  and a look of anxiety  clouded  his face. Once or  twice  he 
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue. 
     But  however  anxious  their  guides might be,  it  was plain  that the 
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with 
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs.  Frodo's 
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows  of 
ghostly grey.  He almost welcomed the coming of  night,  for  then the world 
seemed less pale and empty. 
     The  hobbits  were still  weary,  when  they  set out  again early next 
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and 
they 
hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage. 
     'Our  peril  will  be  greatest just  ere  we  reach the  river,'  said 
Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind  us,  
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.' 
     The  Road  was still running steadily downhill,  and there  was now  in 

####-places much  grass  at either side, in which  the  hobbits walked when  they 
could, to ease  their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a  place 
where the  Road went  suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and 
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes 
ran  along as they hurried  forward; and there seemed to  be a sound of many  
footfalls following their own.  All at once, as if through a  gate of light, 
the Road ran  out again from the end of the tunnel into  the open.  There at 
the bottom  of a sharp incline  they saw before  them a long  flat mile, and 
beyond that  the  Ford of Rivendell. On  the  further side was a steep brown 
bank,  threaded  by  a  winding  path;  and behind  that the tall  mountains 
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky. 
     There was still an  echo as  of following feet  in  the cutting   behind 
them;  a  rushing noise as  if  a wind were  rising and pouring  through the 
branches of the  pines. One moment Glorfindel turned  and  listened, then he 
sprang forward with a loud cry. 
     'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!' 
     The white  horse  leaped  forward.  The  hobbits ran  down  the  slope. 
Glorfindel and  Strider followed  as  rear -guard.  They were only  half  way 
across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of 
the gate in the  trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined 
his horse  in, and halted,  swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and 
then another; then again two more. 
     'Ride forward! Ride!' cried Glorfindel to Frodo. 
     He did not obey at  once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking 
the horse to  a  walk,  he turned and looked  back. The Riders seemed to sit 
upon  their  great steeds  like  threatening  statues  upon a hill, dark and 
solid, while all the woods and land about them  receded as  if into a  mist. 
Suddenly he knew  in  his heart that they were  silently commanding  him  to 
wait. Then at  once  fear  and hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle 
and gripped the hilt of his sword, and with a red flash he drew it. 
     'Ride on! Ride on!' cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called 
to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth! 
     At once the  white horse sprang away  and  sped like the wind along the 
last lap of  the Road. At the same moment the  black horses leaped  down the 
hill in pursuit, and from  the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had 
heard filling  the woods with  horror in the Eastfarthing  far away.  It was 
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends  out from the trees and 

####-rocks  away  on the left four other  Riders came flying.  Two  rode  towards 
Frodo: two  galloped madly towards  the Ford  to  cut  off  his escape. They 
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as 
their courses converged with his.  
     Frodo looked  back for  a moment over  his shoulder. He could no longer  
see  his friends. The Riders  behind  were  falling  back:  even their great 
steeds  were no match  in  speed for the  white elf-horse of  Glorfindel. He 
looked forward again, and hope fa ded. There seemed no chance of reaching the 
Ford before he  was cut off by  the others that had lain in ambush. He could 
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black  
cloaks, and they were robed in  white and  grey. Swords were  naked in their  
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes  glittered,  and they 
called to him with fell voices.  
     Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No 
cry came from him. He shut his eyes  and clung to the horse's mane. The wind 
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A 
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a  
flash of  white fire, the  elf-horse  speeding as  if on wings, passed right 
before the face of the foremost Rider. 
     Frodo heard  the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the 
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony 
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. 
     But the pursuers were close behind. At  the  top of  the bank the horse 
halted and turned  about neighing  fiercely. There were  Nine  Riders at the 
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before  the  threat  of their 
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would  prevent them from crossing as 
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over  
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge  of Rivendell, if once the 
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that  he was commanded urgently to halt.  
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. 
     Suddenly the foremost  Rider  spurred  his horse forward. It checked at 
the water and  reared  up.  With  a  great  effort  Frodo  sat  upright  and 
brandished his sword. 
     'Go back!' he cried. 'Go  back to  the Land of Mordor, and follow me no 
more! '  His voice sounded  thin and shrill  in his  own  ears.  The  Riders 
halted, but Frodo had not  the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him 
with  a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To 

####-Mordor we will take you!' 
     'Go back!' he whispered. 
     'The Ring! The  Ring!'  they cried with  deadly voices; and immediately 
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two 
others. 
     'By Elbereth  and L®thien  the Fair,' said Frodo  with  a last  effort, 
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!' 
     Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in 
his  stirrups, and raised up his hand.  Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his 
tongue  cleave to  his mouth,  and  his heart labouring. His sword broke and  
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost  
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. 
     At that moment there  came a roaring and  a rushing: a  noise  of  loud 
waters rolling many stones. Dimly  Frodo saw the river below him  rise,  and 
down along its course there  came a  plumed cavalry of  waves.  White flames 
seemed to Frodo to  flicker on their crests  and he half fancied that he saw 
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three 
Riders  that  were still in  the midst of  the  Ford were  overwhelmed: they 
disappeared, buried su ddenly under angry  foam.  Those that were behind drew 
back in dismay. 
     With his  last failing senses Frodo  heard cries,  and it seemed to him 
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure 
of white light;  and behind it ran small shadowy forms  waving flames,  that 
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world. 
     The  black  horses were  filled  with madness, and leaping  forward  in 
terror  they bore their riders  into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries 
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo 
felt himself  falling,  and  the  roaring and  confusion seemed  to rise and 
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more. 
 

####-* BOOK II *  

 
 

Chapter 1. Many Meetings 

 
 
     Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that  he 
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge 
of memory. Or  perhaps he  had been ill? But  the ceiling looked strange; it 
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay  a little while longer  
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the  sound of a  
waterfall. 
     `Where am  I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the  ceiling. 'In 
the  House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in  the morning.' said  a voice. 
`It is the morning of October the twenty -fourth, if you want to know.' 
     `Gandalf!'  cried  Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting 
in a chair by the open window.  
     `Yes,' he said, `I am here.  And you  are lucky  to be here, too, after  
all the absurd  things you  have done since  you left home.' Frodo lay  down 
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did 
not think he would get the better of  an argument.  He  was fully awake now,  
and  the memory of  his  journey  was returning: the  disastrous `short cut' 
through the Old Forest the `accident' at The Prancing Pony;  and his madness 
in putting  on the Ring  in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking 
of all these  things and trying  in  vain to  bring  his memory down to  his 
arriving  in  Rivendell, there  was a long  silence, broken only by the soft  
puffs of Gandalf's pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the window.  
     'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?' 
     'Yes, they are  all  safe  and sound,' answered Gandalf.  `Sam was here 
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.' 
     `What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. `It all seemed so dim somehow; 
and it still does.' 
     'Yes,  it  would.  You were beginning to fade,' answered  Gandalf. 'The 
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you  would have  
been 
beyond  our aid.  But you have some strength in you, my dear  hobbit! As you 
showed in the  Barrow. That was touch and  go: perhaps  the  most  dangerous 

####-moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.' 
     'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. `I have not spoken 
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards 
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?' 
     'You have talked long  in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and 
it  has not been hard  for me to  read  your mind and memory. Do not  worry! 
Though I said  "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and 
of the others. It is  no small  feat to have come so far,  and  through such 
dangers, still bearing the Ring.' 
     'We should  never  have done it  without Strider,' said Frodo. `But  we 
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.' 
     'I was delayed,'  said Gandalf, `and that  nearly proved our  ruin. And 
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.' 
     'I wish you would tell me what happened!' 
     'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything 
today, by Elrond's orders.' 
     `But  talking would stop me thinking and wondering,  which are quite as 
tiring,' said Frodo.  'I am wide awake  now, and  I remember so many  things 
that want explaining. Why  were you delayed?  You  ought to tell me that  at 
least.' 
     'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have 
a Council, as soon as you are  well enough. At the  moment  I will only  say 
that I was held captive.' 
     'You?' cried Frodo. 
     'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,'  said the wizard solemnly.  'There are many 
powers  in  the world,  for good  or for evil. Some are  greater  than I am. 
Against  some  I  have not  yet been measured. But my  time  is  coming. The 
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!' 
     `Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?' 
     'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the Black  
Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings.  But 
I did not know  that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at 
once. I heard news  of them only after  I left you in  June; but that  story 
must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.' 
     'Yes,'  said Frodo, `it was Strider that saved  us. Yet I was afraid of 
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we 
met Glorfindel.' 

####-     Gandalf smiled. `I have heard all about  Sam,' he said. 'He has no more 
doubts now.' 
     'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well, 
fond is not the right word.  I mean he is dear to me; though he  is strange, 
and grim  at times. In fact, he reminds  me often of you. I didn't know that 
any of the Big People were  like that.  I thought, well, that  they were just 
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked 
like  Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except 
perhaps the Breelanders.' 
     `You  don't know  much  even  about them, if you  think old Barliman is 
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his  own ground. He thinks less 
than  he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall  in time (as 
they say in Bree). But there are few left in  Middle-earth  like Aragorn son 
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It 
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.' 
     'Do  you  really  mean that  Strider is one  of the people of  the  old 
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder.  `I thought  they had all vanished long ago. I 
thought he was only a Ranger.' 
     'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. `My dear Frodo,  that  is just what the 
Rangers are: the last  remnant in the North  of the great people, the Men of 
the  West.  They have helped  me  before; and I shall need their help in the 
days  to come;  for we  have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is  not yet  at 
rest.' 
     'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But  so far my  only thought has been  to 
get here; and  I  hope I  shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant 
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has 
been as much as I want.' 
     He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have 
been reckoning,' he said, `and I can't bring  the  total up  to October  the 
twenty-fourth. It ought to  be  the  twenty-first. We  must have reached the 
Ford by the twentieth.' 
     'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.  
`How do the side and shou lder feel now?' 
     'I don't know.' Frodo  answered. 'They don't feel at all: which  is  an 
improvement, but'--he made  an  effort--'I can move my  arm again a  little. 
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left  
hand with  his right. 

####-     `Good!'  said  Gandalf.  `It is  mending  fast. You will soon be  sound 
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were 
brought in.' 
     'Days?' said Frodo. 
     `Well, four nights and three days,  to be  exact. The Elves brought you  
from this where you lost  count.  We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has 
hardly left  your  side, day or night, except to run  messages. Elrond is  a  
master of healing, but the weapons of  our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the 
truth, I had very little hope; for  I suspected that there was some fragment 
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last  
night.  Then Elrond  removed a  splinter. It  was deeply  buried. and it was 
working inwards.' 
     Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife  with notched  blade  that 
had vanished in Strider's  hands. `Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf.  `It  is 
gone  now.  It  has  been  melted.  And  it  seems  that  Hobbits fade  very 
reluctantly.  I  have known strong  warriors of  the Big  People  who  would 
quickly have  been overcome by  that splinter, which you bore  for seventeen 
days.' 
     `What would they have done  to me?' asked Frodo. `What  were the Riders 
trying to do?' 
     'They tried to pierce your heart with a  Morgul-knife  which remains in 
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would  have become like they are, only 
weaker and  under their  command. You  would have became a wraith under  
the 
dominion of  the Dark Lord;  and he would have tormented you   for trying  to 
keep his Ring,  if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it 
and seeing it on his hand.' 
     'Thank goodness  I  did  not  realize the horrible danger!' said  Frodo 
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had k nown more, I should 
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!' 
     'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf,  `not  to mention 
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; 
and that  was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow 
shave, so to  speak. You were in gravest peril while you  wore the Ring, for  
then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have  seized  
you. You could see them, and they could see you. ' 
     `I know,' said Frodo.  `They were terrible to behold! But why  could we 

####-all see their horses?' 
     `Because  they are real horses; just as the black robes are real  robes 
that they wear to give shape  to their  nothingness when  they have dealings 
with the living.' 
     `Then  why do these black  horses endure such riders? All other animals 
are terrified when  they draw  near, even  the elf-horse of  Glorfindel. The 
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.' 
     `Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord 
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are orcs and 
trolls, there are wargs  and werewolves; and there have been  and  still are 
many Men,  warriors and kings,  that walk alive under  the  Sun, and yet are 
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.' 
     `What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?' 
     `Yes,  at present,  until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear the 
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but  never aga in will they listen to 
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live  still some of his  chief 
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They  
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the  Blessed  Realm 
live at  once in both worlds, and against both the  Seen and the Unseen they 
have great power.' 
     'I  thought that I saw  a white figure that shone and did not  grow dim 
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?' 
     'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the 
mighty  of  the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord  of a  house of princes. Indeed 
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: 
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind 
in the Shire. But all  such places will soon  become islands under siege, if 
things  go  on  as they are going. The Dark  Lord is  putting forth all  his 
strength. 
     `Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin. while 
his beard went  stiff and straight like bristling wire, `we must keep up our 
courage. You will  soon be  well, if I do not talk you  to death. You are in 
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.' 
     'I haven't any courage to  keep up,'  said Frodo, `but I am not worried 
at  the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell  me the end of the  
affair at the  Ford, as I  keep on asking,  and I shall be  content  for the 
present. After that  I  shall have  another sleep, I  think; but I shan't be 

####-able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.' 
     Gandalf moved  his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo. 
The colour  had come  back to his face, and his  eyes were clear, and  fully 
awake  and aware. He was smiling,  and there seemed to be  little wrong with 
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were 
of transparency,  about  him, and especially  about  the left  hand that lay 
outside upon the coverlet. 
     `Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. `He is not half 
through  yet,  and to what  he  will  come in the  end  not even  Elrond can 
foretell. Not  to evil, I think. He may become  like a glass filled  with  a  
clear light for eyes to see that can.' 
     `You look splendid,' he  said aloud. `I  will risk a brief tale without 
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again. 
This is what happened, as far  as I can gather. The Riders made straight for  
you, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any  
longer: you  had become visible to  them, being already on the threshold  of 
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the 
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save 
you,  if  the white horse could  not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, 
and too many to oppose.  On foot even  Glorfindel and Aragorn together could 
not with stand all the Nine at once. 
     `When the Ringwraiths  swept  by, your friends ran up behind.  Close to 
the Ford  there is a small hollow  beside  the  road masked by a few stunted 
trees.  There they hastily  kindled fire; for  Glorfindel knew that a  flood 
would come down, if  the Riders  tried  to cross,  and then he would have to 
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the  flood 
appeared, he rushed  out, followed by  Aragorn and the. others  with flaming  
brands. Caught between  fire and water, and seeing  an Elf-lord revealed  in 
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their  horses were stricken with madness. 
Three were  carried away by the first assault  of the flood; the others were 
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.' 
     'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo. 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished,  and without them 
they  are crippled.  But  the  Ringwraiths  themselves cannot  be  so easily 
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your 
friends crossed after the  flood had passed; and they found you lying on your  
face at the top of the  bank, with  a broken sword under you. The horse  was 

####-standing guard beside you. You were  pale and cold, and they feared that you 
were  dead,  or  worse.  Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards 
Rivendell.' 
     `Who made the flood?' asked Frodo. 
     'Elrond  commanded it,' answered  Gandalf. `The river of this valley is 
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the 
Ford.  As soon as the  captain  of the Ringwraiths rode into  the  water the 
flood was released.  If I may say so, I added a few touches of  my  own: you  
may  not have noticed, but some of the waves  took the  form of  great white 
horses with shining  white riders; and there wer e many rolling and  grinding 
boulders. For a moment  I was afraid that  we  had let  loose too  fierce  a  
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand  and  wash you all away. There is 
great vigour  in  the  waters  that come down  from the snows  of  the Misty 
Mountains.' 
     `Yes,  it all  comes  back  to  me now,'  said  Frodo:  'the tremendous 
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends  and enemies and all. But 
now we are safe!' 
     Gandalf  looked quickly at Frodo,  but he had shut his  eyes. 'Yes, you  
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to 
celebrate the  victory at the Ford  of Bruinen, and you will all be there in 
places of honour.' 
     'Splendid!' said Frodo. `It is  wonderful  that Elrond, and  Glorfindel 
and such great lords, not to  mention Strider, should take so  much  trouble 
and show me so much kindness.' 
     `Well, there  are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling. 
`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer.  And you  
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.' 
     `Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily. `I wonder where he is. I wish he was 
here and could hear  all  about it.  It would have  made  him laugh, The cow 
jumped  over the  Moon!  And  the poor old troll!'  With that he  fell  fast  
asleep. 
     Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That house 
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, `a perfect house, whether you like food 
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or 
a  pleasant  mixture  of  them all'.  Merely  to  be  there was  a cure  for  
weariness, fear, and sadness.  
     As the evening drew on, Frodo  woke up again, and he found  that  he no 

####-longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and 
probably  for singing and story-telling  afterwards. He got  out of  bed and 
discovered that his  arm was  already nearly as useful again as it ever  had 
been. He found  laid ready  clean garments  of  green cloth that  fitted him 
excellently. Looking  in a mirror  he  was  startled to see  a  much thinner  
reflection  of  himself than  he remembered: it  looked remarkably like  the 
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping  with his uncle in  the Shire; 
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully. 
     `Yes, you  have seen a thing or two since  you last  peeped  out  of  a  
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!' 
     He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune. 
     At that moment there  was a knock on the door,  and Sam came in. He ran 
to Frodo and took his left hand,  awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it  gently  
and then he blushed and turned hastily away. 
     `Hullo, Sam!' said Frodo. 
     `It's  warm!' said Sam. `Meaning your hand, Mr.  Frodo. It has  felt so 
cold through  the long nights. But glory  and trumpets!'  he cried,  turning 
round again with shining  eyes and dancing  on  the floor. 'It's fine to see 
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were 
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.' 
     'I  am ready,' said Frodo.  'Let's  go  and  look  for the rest  of the 
party!' 
     `I can  take you to them,  sir,' said Sam. `It's a  big house this, and 
very  peculiar. Always a bit more to discover,  and no  knowing  what  you'll 
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves  here, and Elves there! Some like 
kings, terrible and splendid;  and some  as merry as children. And the music 
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening 
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.' 
     'I know  what you have  been doing,  Sam,' said Frodo,  taking his arm. 
'But you  shall be merry tonight,  and listen to your  heart's content. Come 
on, guide me round the corners!' 
     Sam led him  along several passages and down many steps and out  into a 
high garden above the  steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting 
in a  porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the 
valley below,  but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far 
above. The air was warm. The sound of running  and falling  water  was loud, 
and the evening  was filled with a  faint scent  of trees and flowers, as if 

####-summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens.  
     `Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing  up.  `Here is our noble cousin! Make 
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!' 
     'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back  of the  porch. `Evil 
things do  not  come into this valley; but all  the same we should not  name 
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of 
Mordor, whose  power is  again stretching out over the world! We are sitting  
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.' 
     `Gandalf  has been saying many cheerful things like that,' said Pippin. 
`He thinks I need keeping in  order.  But it  seems impossible, somehow,  to  
feel  gloomy or depressed in  this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the 
right song for the occasion.' 
     `I feel  like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. `Thou gh  at the moment  I  
feel more like eating and drinking!' 
     `That  will  soon  be cured,'  said  Pippin. `You have shown your usual 
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.' 
     `More than meal!  A  feast!'  said  Merry. `As soon as Gandalf reported 
that  you were  recovered, the  preparations began.' He  had hardly finished 
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. 
     The  hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves  for  the  most  
part,  though there wer e a  few guests of other  sorts.  Elrond, as  was his 
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and 
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.  
     Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of 
whom  so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,  
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were 
revealed 
as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other 
two; but his  long  white  hair, his  sweeping silver beard, and  his  broad 
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient  legend. In his aged 
face under  great snowy brows  his dark eyes  were set like coals that could 
leap suddenly into fire. 
     Glorfindel  was tall and straight;  his  hair was of shining gold,  his 
face fair and young and fearless and full  of  joy; his eyes were bright and 
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and  in his hand was 
strength. 
     The face  of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was 

####-written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark 
as the shadows of twilight, and upon  it  was set  a circlet  of silver; his 
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of 
stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale 
as  a tried warrior in  the  fulness  of  his strength.  He was the Lord  of 
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. 
     In  the  middle of the table, against  the  woven cloths upon the wall, 
there  was a chair under  a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look  upon, 
and so like was she in form of womanhood  to Elrond that Frodo  guessed that 
she was one of his  close kindred. Young she was  and yet not so. The braids 
of her dark  hair were touched  by no frost, her white arms and  clear  face 
were  flawless and smooth,  and the light  of stars was in  her bright eyes,  
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge 
were in  her  glance, as  of  one  who has known  many things that the years 
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with  a cap of silver lace netted 
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament 
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver. 
     So it was  that Frodo saw  her whom few  mortals  had yet seen;  Arwen,  
daughter  of Elrond,  in whom it  was said  that the likeness of L®thien had 
come on earth again; and she was called  Undumiel, for she was  the Evenstar 
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin,  in Lurien 
beyond  the mountains,  and  was  but  lately  returned to Rivendell  to her  
father's  house.  But  her  brothers, Elladan and  Elrohir,  were  out  upon 
errantry: for  they rode often far  afield with the  Rangers  of  the North, 
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the orcs.  
     Such loveliness  in  living  thing  Frodo had  never  seen  before  nor  
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find  that he 
had a seat at  Elrond's table among all these  folk so high and fair. Though 
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several  cushions, he felt very 
small, and  rather out of place; but that  feeling quickly passed. The feast  
was  merry and  the food all that his  hunger could desire. It was some time 
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours. 
     He  looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be  allowed to wait 
on his  master, but had been  told that  for this  time he  was  a  guest of 
honour. Frodo could see him  now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper  
end  of  one of  the side-tables close to  the dais. He could see no sign of 
Strider. 

####-     Next to Frodo  on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly 
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was  white, nearly as white as the 
snow-white cloth  of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck  
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. 
     'Welcome  and well met!'  said the dwarf, turning towards  him. Then he 
actually rose from his seat and bowed. `Gluin at your service,' he said, and 
bowed still lower. 
     'Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your   family's,'  said  Frodo 
correctly, rising  in surprise and scattering  his cushions. 'Am I right  in 
guessing that you are the  Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the  great 
Thorin Oakenshield?' 
     `Quite  right,'  answered  the dwarf,  gathering up  the  cushions  and 
courteously assist ing  Frodo back  into his seat. 'And I do  not ask, for  I 
have  already been  told that you  are  the  kinsman and adopted heir of our 
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.' 
     `Thank you very much,' said Frodo. 
     'You have had  some very strange  adventures, I hear,'  said  Gluin. 'I  
wonder greatly  what brings  four hobbits  on so long a journey. Nothing like 
it  has happened  since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire 
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?' 
     'I  think  we  will not  speak  of it,  at least not  yet,' said  Frodo 
politely. 
     He guessed that  even in Elrond's house the matter of  the Ring was not 
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his  troubles for a  
time. 'But  I am  equally  curious,'  he  added,  `to learn what  brings  so 
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.' 
     Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I  think we will not speak 
yet  of that either. Master  Elrond will summon us all ere long,  I believe, 
and  then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that  may be 
told.' 
     Throughout the  rest  of  the  meal  they talked  together,  but  Frodo 
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring, 
seemed small and far-away and unimportant. while  Gluin had much to tell  of 
events in the northern regions of Wilderland.  Frodo  learned that Grimbeorn 
the Old, son of  Beorn, was now the lord  of  many sturdy men ,  and to their  
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.  
     'lndeed,' said Gluin,  `if it were not for  the  Beornings, the passage 

####-from  Dale  to Rivendell  would long  ago  have become  impossible. They are 
valiant men and keep open  the High Pass  and the Ford of Carrock. But their 
tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his  head;  `and like Beorn of old 
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty,  and that is much 
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to  us  as the  Men  of 
Dale. They  are  good  folk,  the Bardings. The  grandson of Bard the Bowman 
rules  them,  Brand son of Bain  son of Bard. He is a  strong king.  and his 
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.' 
     'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo. 
     `There is much  to tell, good and bad,' said  Gluin; 'yet it  is mostly 
good:  we have so far been fortunate, though  we do not escape the shadow of 
these  times. If you  really  wish  to  hear of us, I will tell  you tidings 
gladly.  But stop  me when  you are  weary!  Dwarves'  tongues  run  on when 
speaking of their handiwork, they say.' 
     And with that  Gluin embarked on a long  account of the doings  of  the 
Dwarf-kingdom.  He  was delighted  to have found  so polite a  listener; for  
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject, 
though  actually he  soon  got rather lost among the strange names of people 
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to 
hear that Dbin was  still  King under the  Mountain, and was now old (having 
passed  his two hundred  and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. 
Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies  seven were 
still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori,  Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur 
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at 
table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him. 
     'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo. 
     A shadow passed  over Gluin's face.  `We do not know,' he answered. 'It 
is largely  on account of  Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those 
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!' 
     Gluin began then  to talk  of the works of  his  people,  telling Frodo 
about their  great  labours in Dale  and under the  Mountain. 'We have  done 
well,' he  said. `But  in  metalwork  we cannot rival  our fathers, many  of 
whose. secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but  we cannot 
again make mail or blade  to match  those  that were  made before the dragon 
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should 
see  the  waterways of Dale,  Frodo, and the fountains, and  the pools!  You  
should  see  the  stone-paved roads  of  many  colours! And  the  halls  and 

####-cavernous streets under the earth with  arches  carved  like trees;  and the 
terraces and  towers upon the Mountain's  sides! Then you would  see that we 
have not been idle.' 
     'I will come and see them, if  ever I can,' said  Frodo. 'How surprised 
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!' 
     Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you 
not?' he asked. 
     `Yes,' answered Frodo. 'I would rather see him than all  the towers and 
palaces in the world.' 
     At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down 
the hall, and the company followed them in due  order. The doors were thrown 
open, and they went across a  wide passage and through other doors, and came 
into a further hall.  In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in 
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. 
     Frodo found himself  walking with  Gandalf. `This  is the Hall of Fire' 
said the wizard.  `Here you will hear many songs and  tales-if you  can keep 
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people 
come here who wish for peace,  and thought. There is always a fire here, all  
the year round, but there is little other light.' 
     As Elrond entered and  went towards  the seat prepared for  him, elvish 
minstrels began to  make sweet  music.  Slowly  the hall  filled,  and Frodo 
looked  with delight upon  the many  fair faces that were gathered together; 
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in  their hair. Suddenly 
he noticed, not far from the further  end of  the fire, a small dark  figure 
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on  the 
ground was a drinking-cup  and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was 
ill 
(if people were ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable  to  come to the 
feast. His head seemed sunk  in sleep on  his breast, and a fold of his dark 
cloak was drawn over his face. 
     Elrond wen t forward and stood beside the  silent figure. 'Awake  little 
master.  he  said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. 
'Now  at last  the hour has come that you have wished  for, Frodo,' he said. 
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.' 
     The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 
     `Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward. 
     `Hullo, Frodo my  lad!' said Bilbo.  `So  you have got here at  last. I 

####-hoped you would manage it. Well,  well! So  all this  feasting  is  in  your 
honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?' 
     'Why weren't  you there?' cried Frodo.  `And why haven't I been allowed 
to see you before?' 
     `Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by 
your  side with Sam each day. But as for  the feast` I don't go in  for such 
things much now. And I had something else to do.' 
     `What were you doing?' 
     `Why, sitting and thinking.  I do  a lot of that  nowadays, and this is 
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!' he said, cocking an 
eye at Elrond.  There was a  bright  twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness 
that Frodo could see. `Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want 
to  know,  you  have  all come  out from your  feast too  soon, and  you have 
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck  over a line  or  
two, and was thinking  about them; but  now I don't suppose I shall ever get  
them right.  There will  be such a deal of singing  that  the  ideas wi ll be 
driven clean out  of my head.  I  shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to 
help me. Where is he?' 
     Elrond laughed. `He  shall  be found,' he  said. `Then you two shall go 
into a corner  and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before 
we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though 
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. 
     In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly 
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious 
of the mirth and music in the hall about them.  Bilbo had not much to say of 
himself. When  he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the 
Road or in the country on either side;  but  somehow  he had steered all the 
time towards Rivendell. `I got here without  much adventure,' he  said, `and 
after  a rest I went on with  the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't  
travel again.  Old  Balin had gone away. Then I came  back  here, and here I  
have been. I have done this and that. I have  written some more of my  book. 
And, of course, I make  up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to 
please  me,  I think; for, of  course,  they aren't really  good  enough for  
Rivendell. And I listen and  I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just  
is. A remarkable place altogether. 
     `I  hear  all kinds of  news,  from  over the Mountains, and out of the 
South,  but  hardly  anything  from the Shire.  I heard  about  the Ring, of 

####-course. Gandalf has been here often. Not  that he has told me a  great deal, 
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me 
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It  is a pity that 
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I  could  have brought  the thing here 
myself  long ago without  so much trouble. I have  thought several  times of 
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they  would not let 
me: Gandalf and Elrond,  I  mean.  They seemed  to  think that the Enemy was 
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught 
me 
tottering about in the Wild. 
     'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on,  Bilbo. It would do no good 
to  you or to others, if you tried to meddle  with it  again." Odd  sort  of 
remark,  just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after  you, so I  let 
things be. I am frightfully glad to  see  you safe and sound.' He paused and 
looked at Frodo doubtfully. 
     `Have  you got it here?' he asked  in a whisper. `I  ca n't help feeling 
curious,  you know, after all I've heard. I  should very much like  just  to 
peep at it again.' 
     `Yes, I've  got  it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. `It 
looks just the same as ever it did.' 
     `Well, I should just lik e to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo. 
     When he had dressed, Frodo found  that while he slept the Ring had been 
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out. 
Bilbo  put  out  his hand.  But Frodo  quickly drew  back the Ring.  To  his 
distress  and  amazement he found that he was no  longer looking at Bilbo; a  
shadow seemed to  have fallen between them, and through it he found  himself 
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.  
He felt a desire to strike him. 
     The music  and singing round them seemed  to falter and a silence fell. 
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. `I  
understand  now,' he said. `Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have  come in 
for this burden: sorry about everything.  Don't adventures ever have an end?  
I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't  
be helped. I wonder if it's any good  trying  to finish my  book? But  don't 
let's  worry about it now-let 's have some real News! Tell  me all about  the 
Shire!' 
     Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly  a  shred 

####-of  memory.  The light  and music  of  Rivendell was about  him again. Bilbo 
smiled  and laughed happily. Every  item  of news  from the Shire that Frodo 
could  tell-aided and corrected now and again  by  Sam-was  of the  greatest  
interest to  him, from the felling of  the least tree to the  pranks of  the 
smallest child  in  Hobbiton. They were so deep in  the doings  of  the Four 
Farthings that they did not  notice  the arrival of a man clad in dark green 
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. 
     Suddenly  Bilbo  looked  up. 'Ah, there you are  at last,  D®nadan!' he 
cried. 
     `Strider!' said Frodo. `You seem to have a lot of names.' 
     `Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo. 
`What do you call him that for?' 
     `They call me that in Bree,' said Strider laughing, 'and that is how  I 
was introduced to him.' 
     `And why do you call him D®nadan?' asked Frodo. 
     `The D®nadan,' said Bilbo. `He is often called that here. But I thought 
you  knew  enough  Elvish  at  least to  know  d®n-udan: Man  of  the  West, 
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!' He turned to Strider. 
     `Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Lady 
Arwen was there.' 
     Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. `I  know,'  he said. 'But often I 
must put  mirth aside. Elladan  and Elrohir  have returned  out  of the Wild 
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.' 
     `Well, my  dear fellow,' said  Bilbo, `now you've heard the news, can't  
you spare me  a moment?  I want your help in  something urgent.  Elrond says 
this song of mine is to be finished  before the end of the evening, and I am 
stuck. Let's go off into a corner and polish it up!' 
     Strider smiled. `Come then!' he said. `Let me hear it!' 
     Frodo  was left  to himself  for a while. for Sam had fallen asleep. He 
was  alone and felt rather forlorn`  although  all  about  him  the  folk of 
Rivendell were gathered. But  those near  him were silent,  intent upon  the 
music of the voices and the instruments. and they  gave no heed to  anything 
else. Frodo began to listen. 
     At first the beauty of the  melodies  and  of  the interwoven  words in 
elven-tongues, even though he understood  them little` held him in  a spell, 
as soon as  he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took  
shape, and  visions of  far la nds  and  bright things that he had  never yet 

####-imagined  opened out before him;  and the firelit  hall became like a golden 
mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the  world. Then the 
enchantment  became more and more dreamlike, until  he  felt  that an endless 
river of  swelling gold  and  silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous 
for its  pattern to be comprehended;  it  became part of  the throbbing  air 
about him, and  it  drenched and  drowned him. Swiftly  he  sank  under  its 
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. 
     There  he wandered long in a dream of  music  that turned  into running 
water, and  then suddenly into a  voice. It seemed  to be the voice of Bilbo 
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words. 
     Edrendil was a mariner 
     that tarried in Arvernien; 
     he built a boat of timber felled 
     in Nimbrethil to journey in; 
     her sails he wove of silver fair, 
     of silver were her lanterns made, 
     her prow was fashioned like a swan, 
     and light upon her banners laid. 
 
     In panoply of ancient kings, 
     in chain‚d rings he armoured him; 
     his shining shield was scored with runes 
     to ward all wounds and harm from him; 
     his bow was made of dragon-horn, 
     his arrows shorn of ebony, 
     of silver was his habergeon, 
     his scabbard of chalcedony; 
     his sword of steel was valiant, 
     of adamant his helmet tall, 
     an eagle -plume upon his crest, 
     upon his breast an emerald. 
 
     Beneath the Moon and under star 
     he wandered far from northern strands, 
     bewildered on enchanted ways 
     beyond the days of mortal lands. 
     From gnashing of the Narrow Ice 

####-     where shadow lies on frozen hills, 
     from nether heats and burning waste  
     he turned in haste, and roving still 
     on starless waters far astray 
     at last he came to Night of Naught, 
     and passed, and never sight he saw 
     of shining shore nor light he sought. 
 
     The winds of wrath came driving him, 
     and blindly in the foam he fled 
     from west to east and errandless, 
     unheralded he homeward sped. 
 
     There flying Elwing came to him, 
     and flame was in the darkness lit; 
     more bright than light of diamond 
     the fire upon her carcanet. 
     The Silmaril she bound on him 
     and crowned him with the living light 
     and dauntless then with burning brow 
     he turned his prow; and in the night 
     from Otherworld beyond the Sea 
     there strong and free a storm arose, 
     a wind of power in Tarmenel; 
     by paths that seldom mortal goes 
     his boat it bore with biting breath  
     as might of death across the grey 
     and long-forsaken seas distressed: 
     from east to west he passed away. 
 
     Through Evernight he back was borne 
     on black and roaring wa ves that ran 
     o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores 
     that drowned before the Days began, 
     until he heard on strands of pearl 
     when ends the world the music long, 
     where ever foaming billows roll 

####-     the yellow gold and jewels wan. 
     He saw the Mountain silent rise 
     where twilight lies upon the knees 
     of Valinor, and Eldamar 
     beheld afar beyond the seas. 
     A wanderer escaped from night 
     to haven white he came at last, 
     to Elvenhome the green and fair 
     where keen the air, where pale as glass 
     beneath the Hill of Ilmarin  
     a-glimmer in a valley sheer 
     the lamplit towers of Tirion 
     are mirrored on the Shadowmere. 
 
     He tarried there from errantry, 
     and melodies they taught to him, 
     and sages old him marvels told, 
     and harps of gold they brought to him. 
     They clothed him then in elven-white, 
     and seven lights before him sent, 
     as through the Calacirian 
     to hidden land forlorn he went. 
     He came unto the timeless halls 
     where shining fall the countless years, 
     and endless reigns the Elder King 
     in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer; 
     and words unheard were spoken then 
     of folk of Men and Elven-kin, 
     beyond the world were visions showed 
     forbid to those that dwell therein. 
 
     A ship then new they built for him 
     of mithril and of elven-glass 
     with shining prow; no shaven oar 
     nor sail she bore on silver mast: 
     the Silmaril as lantern light 
     and banner bright with living flame 

####-     to gleam thereon by Elbereth  
     herself was set, who thither came 
     and wings immortal made for him, 
     and laid on him undying doom, 
     to sail the shoreless skies and come 
     behind the Sun and light of Moon. 
 
     From Evereven's lofty hills 
     where softly silver fountains fall 
     his wings him bore, a wandering light, 
     beyond the mighty Mountain Wall. 
     From World's End then he turned away 
     and yearned again to find afar 
     his home through shadows journeying, 
     and burning as an island star 
     on high above the mists he came, 
     a distant flame before the Sun, 
     a wonder ere the waking dawn  
     where grey the Norland waters run. 
 
     And over Middle -earth he passed 
     and heard at last the weeping sore 
     of women and of elven-maids 
     in Elder Days, in years of yore. 
     gut on him mighty doom was laid, 
     till Moon should fade, an orb‚d star 
     to pass, and tarry never more 
     on Hither Shores where mortals are; 
     for ever still a herald on 
     an errand that should never rest 
     to bear his shining lamp afar, 
     the Flammifer of Westernesse. 
     The  chanting  ceased. Frodo opened his eyes  and  saw  that Bilbo  was 
seated  on  his  stool  in  a  circle  of listeners,  who  were smiling   and 
applauding. 
     `Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf. 
     Bilbo got up  and bowed.  `I am  flattered, Lindir,'  he said. 'But  it 

####-would be too tiring to repeat it all.' 
     'Not too  tiring  for you,' the Elves answered laughing.  'You k now you  
are never tired  of reciting  your own verses.  But really  we cannot answer  
your question at one hearing!' 
     `What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were  mine,  and which 
were the D®nadan's?' 
     'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said 
the Elf.  
     'Nonsense, Lindir,'  snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between a  
Man  and a Hobbit,  your  judgement is  poorer than  I  imagined. They're as 
different as peas and apples.' 
     'Maybe.  To  sheep  other sheep no  doubt  appear  different,'  laughed 
Lindir. `Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other  
business.' 
     'I won't  argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music 
and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if  you want to.' 
     He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a low 
voice. `It went off  better than  I expected. I don't often get asked for  a  
second hearing. What did you think of it?' 
     `I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling. 
     `You needn't,' said Bilbo. `As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except 
that Aragorn insisted  on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it 
important. I don't know  why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing 
rather above my head, and  he  said that if I had  the cheek to make  verses 
about  Edrendil in the house  of  Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was 
right.' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It seemed to  me  to fit somehow, though I 
can't explain. I was half asleep when you began,  and it seemed to follow on  
from  something that I  was dreaming about.  I didn't understand that it was 
really you speaking until near the end.' 
     `It  is  difficult to  keep awake here, until you get used to it;'  said 
Bilbo.  'Not that hobbits  would ever acquire quite  the elvish appetite for  
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more. 
They will be going on  for a long time yet. What  do you say to slipping off 
for some more quiet talk?' 
     `Can we?' said Frodo. 
     `Of course. This is merrymaking not business.  Come and go as you like,  

####-as long as you don't make a noise.' 
     They  got  up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made  for  the 
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a  smile on his face. In 
spite of his delight in  Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of  regret as they 
passed  out of the Hall of Fire.  Even as they  stepped over the threshold a  
single clear voice rose in song. 
     A Elbereth Gilthoniel, 
     silivren penna mnriel 
     o menel aglar elenath! 
     Na-chaered palan -dnriel 
     o galadhremmin ennorath, 
     Fanuilos, le linnathon 
     nef aear, sn nef aearon! 
     Frodo halted  for a moment,  looking back. Elrond was in his  chair and 
the  fire was on his face like summer -light upon the trees. Near him sat the 
Lady Arwen. To  his surprise  Frodo saw that Aragorn stood  beside  her; his 
dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed  to be  clad  in elven-mail, and a  
star shone  on his breast.  They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed  
to Frodo that Arwen  turned towards him, and the light of  her eyes  fell on 
him from afar and pierced his heart. 
     He  stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song 
fell like  clear  jewels  of blended  word  and melody. `It  is  a  song  to 
Elbereth,' said Bilbo. `They will sing that, and other songs of the  Blessed 
Realm, many times tonight. Come on!' 
     He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the  gar dens 
and looked  south across the ravine  of the Bruinen. There they sat for some  
while,  looking  through  the   window   at  the  bright  stars  above   the 
steep-climbing  woods, and  talking softly. They  spoke no more of the small 
news of  the  Shire far  away, nor  of  the dark  shadows  and  perils  that 
encompassed  them,  but  of  the  fair  things  they  had seen in the  world 
together,  of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the  gentle fall of the 
bright year in the woods.  
     At last there came  a knock  on the door. `Begging  your pardon,'  said 
Sam,  putting in his head, `but I was just wondering if you would be wanting  
anything.' 
     `And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied  Bilbo. `I guess you mean that 
it is time your master went to bed.' 

####-     `Well, sir,  there is a  Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got 
up today for the first time.' 
     `Quite right, Sam,'  laughed Bilbo. `You can  trot off and tell Gandalf 
that he  has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it  has been good  
to see you again! There are no folk like  hobbits  after all for a real good 
talk. I am getting very  old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to 
see your chapters of  our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I  think, and 
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!' 
 
