 

 
 
     Before  the  next day dawned  their journey to  Mordor  was  over.  The 
marshes and the desert  were  behind them. Before  them, darkling  against a  
pallid sky, the great mountains reared their threatening heads.  
     Upon the west of  Mordor marched the gloomy range  of  Ephel D速ath, the 
Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north  the broken peaks and barren  ridges 
of  Ered  Lithui, grey as ash. But as these ranges  approached one  another, 
being indeed  but  parts  of  one  great  wall about  the mournful plains of 
Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of N速rnen amidmost, they 
swung out  long arms northward;  and between  these arms  there  was a  deep 
defile.  This was Cirith Gorgor,  the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land 
of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward  from 
its mouth were two  sheer  hills, black -boned and bare. Upon  them stood the 
Teeth  of  Mordor, two towers strong and  tall. In days long past they  were 
built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power,  after the overthrow of 
Sauron and his flight, lest he  should seek to return to his old realm.  But 
the strength of Gondor  failed, and men slept, and for long years the towers 
stood  empty.  Then Sauron returned. Now  the watch-towers, which  had fallen 
into  decay,  were  repaired, and  filled  with arms,  and  garrisoned  with 
ceaseless vigilance. Stony-faced they were, with  dark  window-holes staring 
north and east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes. 
     Across the  mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff,  the Dark Lord  had 
built a rampart of stone. In it  there  was a single gate of  iron, and upon 
its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side 
the  rock  was bored into  a hundred caves and maggot -holes: there a host of 
orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to  war. 
None could pass the  Teeth of  Mordor and not feel  their bite, unless  they 
were summoned by Sauron, or knew the  secret  passwords  that would open 
the 
Morannon, the black gate of his land. 
     The two hobbits  gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from 
a distance they could see  in the dim light the movement of the black guards 
upon the wall,  and  the patrols before the gate. They lay now peering  over  
the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the out-stretched shadow of the northmost  

####-buttress of Ephel D速ath. Winging  the heavy air in a straight flight a crow, 
maybe, would have flown  but a furlong from  their hiding-place to the  black 
summit  of  the  nearer  tower. A faint smoke curled  above it, as  if  fire 
smouldered in the hill beneath. 
     Day  came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless  ridges of Ered 
Lithui.  Then su ddenly the cry of brazen-throated  trumpets was  heard: from 
the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in 
the  hills  came  answering calls; and  further  still, remote but  deep and 
ominous, there echoed in  the hollow land  beyond the mighty horns  and drums 
of Barad-dyr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor;  and 
the night-guards were  summoned to their dungeons and  deep  halls, and  the 
day-guards, evil-eyed and fell,  were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed 
dimly on the battlement. 
     `Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as 
if that's about as far as we are ever going  to get. My word, but the Gaffer  
would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a 
bad  end, if I didn't watch my step, he  did. But  now I don't suppose  I'll 
ever see  the  old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of  I told'ee so, Sam: 
more's the  pity. He could go on telling me as  long as he'd got breath,  if 
only I could see his old face again. But I'd have to get a wash first, or he 
wouldn't know me. 
     `I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We  can't go no 
further -unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.' 
     `No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't  go further. Smjagol  said so. 
He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes.  my 
precious, we do see. Smjagol  knew  hobbits  could  not  go this way. O yes.  
Smjagol knew ' 
     'Then  what the plague  did you  bring  us here  for? '  said  Sam, not 
feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable. 
     `Master said so. Master says:  Bring  us to the  Gate. So  good Smjagol 
does so. Master said so, wise master.' 
     'I did,' said  Frodo. His face  was grim  and set. but resolute. He was 
filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness,  but he cowered  no longer, and 
his eyes were clear. `I  said so, because  I purpose  to enter Mordor, and I 
know no other way. Therefore I shall go this  way. I do not ask anyone to go 
with me.' 
     `No, no,  master! ' wailed  Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great 

####-distress.  `No use  that way! No use! Don't take  the Precious to Him! He'll 
eat us all,  if He gets it,  eat all the world. Keep it, nice master, and be 
kind to Smjagol. Don't let  Him have  it. Or go away.  go to nice places, and 
give it back to little Smjagol. Yes, yes, master: give  it back, eh? Smjagol 
will  keep it  safe;  he will do  lots of good, especially to nice  hobbits.  
Hobbits go home. Don't go to the Gate! ' 
     'I am commanded  to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,' 
said Frodo. 'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after  
must come.' 
     Sam said nothing.  The look on Frodo's face was enough for him  he knew 
that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope  in 
the affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful hobbit he had not needed 
hope, as  long as  despair could  be  postponed. Now they  were come to  the 
bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had 
chiefly come  for, and he would  still stick to him. His master would not go 
to Mordor alone. Sam would go with him-and at any rate they would get rid of 
Gollum. 
     Gollum, however, did not  intend to  be  got rid  of, yet. He knelt  a t 
Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and  squeaking. 'Not this way, master! ' he 
pleaded, 'There is another way. O  yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, 
more difficult to find, more secret. But  Smjagol knows it. Let Smjagol show 
you!  ' 
     'Another wa y!  ' said Frodo  doubtfully, looking down  at  Gollum  with 
searching eyes. 
     'Yess! Yess indeed! There was another  way. Smjagol found it. Let's  go 
and see if it's still there! ' 
     `You have not spoken of this before.' 
     `No.  Master did not ask.  Master did not say what he  meant  to do. He 
does not  tell poor  Smjagol. He says: Smjagol, take me to  the Gate  -- and 
then good bye! Smjagol can run away and  be good. But now he says: I purpose 
to enter Mordor this way.  So  Smjagol is very  afraid. He does not  want to 
lose  nice  master.  And he promised, master made  him promise,  to save the 
Precious. But master is going to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand, 
if master will go this way. So Smjagol must save them both, and he thinks of 
another  way  that there was, once upon a  time.  Nice  master. Smjagol very 
good, always helps.' 
     Sam frowned. If he could have  bored holes in Gollum  with his eyes, he 

####-would have done. His  mind was full of doubt.  To all appearances Gollum was 
genuinely  distressed  and anxious to  help Frodo. But  Sam, remembering the 
overheard debate, found it hard  to believe that the long submerged  Smjagol  
had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the 
debate. Sam's  guess was that  the Smjagol and Gollum halves (or what in his 
own mind he called Slinker  and Stinker) had made  a  truce and a  temporary 
alliance: neither  wanted  the Enemy to get the Ring;  both  wished to  keep 
Frodo from capture, and under their  eye, as long as possible -- at any rate 
as long as Stinker still had  a  chance  of laying hands  on his 'Precious'. 
Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted. 
     `And it's a good thing neither half  of the old villain don't know what 
master means to do ,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put 
an end  to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I 
bet.  Anyhow old Stinker  is so frightened  of the Enemy  --  and  he's under 
orders  of some kind from him, or was  -- that he'd give us away rather than 
be caught helping us; and rather than let his  Precious be melted, maybe. At 
least  that's my idea. And I hope  the master will  think it  out carefully. 
He's  as wise as any,  but he's soft -hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond 
any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.' 
     Frodo did not answer  Gollum at once.  While these  doubts were passing 
through Sam's slow  but  shrewd  mind, he  stood gazing out towards the dark 
cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved 
in the side of a  low  hill, at some  little height above  a long trenchlike 
valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the  
midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western  watch-tower.  
By morning-light the roads that converged upon the  Gate of Mordor could 
now 
be clearly  seen,  pale  and  dusty; one  winding  back  northwards; another  
dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui; 
and  a  third that ran towards him. As  it bent sharply round  the tower, it 
entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where  he stood. 
Westward, to his  right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains,  
and  went off southwards into  the deep shadows that mantled all the western 
sides of Ephel D速ath; beyond his sight it journeyed on  into the narrow land 
between the mountains and the Great River. 
     As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement 
on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the 

####-most part they were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and 
wastes beyond. But here and there he caught the gleam of spears and helmets;  
and over the levels beside  the roads horsemen could be seen  riding in many  
companies.  He  remembered his  vision from afar upon Amon Hen,  so few 
days 
before, though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope that 
had for one wild  moment stirred in his heart was vain. The trumpets had not  
rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by 
the men of Gondor, risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long 
passed away. These were Men  of  other  race, out  of  the  wide  Eastlands, 
gathering  to the summons of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before 
his  Gate by  night  and  now marched in to swell  his mounting power. As if 
suddenly made fully  aware of the  peril  of their  position, alone,  in the 
growing light of day, so near  to this  vast menace, Frodo quickly drew  his 
frail grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then he 
turned to Gollum. 
     `Smjagol,' he said, `I will trust you once more. lndeed it seems that I 
must do so,  and that it is my fate to receive help from you. where  I least  
looked  for  it, and  your  fate to help me whom you long  pursued with evil 
purpose.  So far  you have deserved well  of me  and have kept your  promise 
truly. Truly, I say and mean,' he added with a glance at Sam, 'for twice now 
we have been in your  power, and  you have  done no harm to us. Nor have you  
tried to take  from  me what you once sought.  May the third time  prove the 
best! But I warn you, Smjagol, you are in danger.' 
     `Yes, yes,  master!  '  said Gollum. `Dreadful  danger! Smjagol's bones 
shake to think of it. but he doesn't run away. He must help nice master.' 
     'I  did not mean  the danger that we all  share,' said Frodo. 'I mean a  
danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious.  
Remember tha t! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to 
your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me 
just  now, foolishly.  Give it back  to  Smjagol you  said. Do  not say that 
again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will  never get it back. But 
the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. 
In  the last need, Smjagol, I should put  on the Precious; and the  Precious 
mastered you  long ago. If  I,  wearing  it, were to  command you, you would 
obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice  or to cast yourself into the 
fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Smjagol!' 

####-     Sam looked at his  master with approval, but also with surprise:  there 
was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before. 
It had  always been a notion  of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was 
of  such a high  degree that it  must imply a fair measure of  blindness. Of 
course, he  also  firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the 
wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and 
of Gandalf). Gollum in  his  own  way,  and with  much  more excuse  as  his 
acquaintance was  much briefer, may have _made a  similar mistake, confusing 
kindness and blindness.  At any rate  this speech abashed and terrified him. 
He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice master. 
     Frodo waited patiently for a while,  then he spoke again less  sternly. 
`Come now, Gollum  or Smjagol if  you wish, tell  me of this other way,  and 
show me,  if you can,  what hope  there is in  it,  enough to justify me  in 
turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.' 
     But  Gollum  was in  a  pitiable state, and  Frodo's  threat  had quite 
unnerved  him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his 
mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled 
on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Smjagol'. After  
a  while he grew a  little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if  a  
traveller followed the road  that turned west of Ephel D速ath,  he would come 
in  time to a  crossing in a circle of  dark trees. On the right a road went 
down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went 
on southwards.  
     `On,  on,  on,'  said Gollum. `We  never went that way, but they say it 
goes a  hundred leagues, until  you  can  see the Great Water that is  never  
still. There are lots of fishes there, and big birds eat fishes: nice birds:  
but we never  went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further  still 
there are more  lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot  there, and 
there are seldom any clouds, and the men are  fierce and have dark faces. We 
do not want to see that land.' 
     `No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third 
turning?  ' 
     `O yes, O yes, there is a third way,' said Gollum. `That is the road to 
the  left.  At  once it begins to climb up,  up, winding  and climbing  back 
towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it. 
suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.' 
     `See it, see it? What will you see? ' 

####-     `The  old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used  to hear tales 
from the South, when Smjagol was young, long  ago. O yes. we  used  to  tell 
lots of  tales in the evening, sitting by the  banks  of the Great River, in 
the willow-lands, when the River was younger too, gollum, gollum.' He  began 
to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited patiently. 
     `Tales  out  of  the South,' Gollum went on again, `about  the tall Men 
with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills  of stone, and the silver  
crown of their King and his White Tree:  wonderful  tales.  They  built very 
tall towers,  and one they raised was silver -white,  and in it there  was  a  
stone like the Moon, and round it were great  white walls. O yes, there were 
many tales about the Tower of the Moon.' 
     `That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built ' said 
Frodo. `It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.' 
     `Yes, He has only four  on the Black Hand,  but they are enough,'  said 
Gollum shuddering. 'And He hated Isildur's city.' 
     'What does he not  hate?  '  said Frodo. 'But what has the Tower of the 
Moon to do with us? ' 
     'Well, master, there  it  was and there it is: the  tall tower  and the 
white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful.  He conquered it  
long ago. It is a very terrible place  now. Travellers shiver  when they see 
it, they creep out of sight, they  avoid its shadow. But master will have to 
go that way. That is the  only other way, For the mountains are lower there, 
and the old road goes up and up, until it reaches  a dark  pass at  the top, 
and then it goes down,  down, again  --  to Gorgoroth.'  His voice sank  to a  
whisper and he shuddered. 
     `But how will  that help us?  ' asked  Sam. `Surely the Enemy knows all 
about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close as th is? The  
tower isn't empty, is it? ' 
     `O no, not empty!  ' whispered Gollum. `It seems empty, but it isn't, O 
no!  Very  dreadful things  live  there.  Orcs. yes always  Orcs; but  worse 
things, worse things live  there too. The road climbs right under the shadow  
of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves on the  road that they don't  
know about. The things inside know: the Silent Watchers.' 
     `So  that's your advice  is it,' said Sam, 'that  we  should go another  
long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one,  when we 
get there, if we ever do? ' 
     `No,   no  indeed,'  said  Gollum.  `Hobbits  must  see,  must  try  to 

####-understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round, but it 
attends more to some places than to  others. He can't see everything  all at 
once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy 
Mountains down to  the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one 
can  come  to the  Moontower without fighting big battle at the  bridges, or  
getting lots of boats which they cannot hide and He will know about.' 
     'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and  thinking,' said Sam. 
`Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? ' 
     'Not  nice  hobbit,  not sensible,'  said Gollum, giving Sam  an  angry 
glance  and turning to Frodo. 'Smjagol has talked  to Orcs,  yes  of course, 
before he met master, and to many peoples:  he has walked very far. And what 
he says now many peoples  are saying.  It's here  in the North that  the big 
danger is for Him, and for us. He will come  out of the Black  Gate one day,  
one  day soon. That is the only  way big armies can come. But away down west  
He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.' 
     `Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up  and 
knock at  their gate  and ask if we're on the right road  for Mordor? Or are 
they too silent to answer? It's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and 
save ourselves a long tramp.' 
     'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum.  `It isn't funny, O no! Not 
amusing. It's  nut sense to try  and get into  Mordor at all. But  if master  
says I must go  or I will go, then he  must try some way. But he must not go 
to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Smjagol helps. nice 
Smjagol. though no one tells him what it is  all about. Smjagol helps again. 
He found it. He knows it.' 
     'What did you find? ' asked Frodo. 
     Gollum crouched down and his voice  sank to a whisper again. 'A  little 
path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes,  
very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then'  -- his voice sank even 
lower  -- `a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last  a little cleft, and  a path 
high  above  the  main pass. It was that way  that  Smjagol got  out  of the 
darkness. But it was years ago. The path may  have vanished now; but perhaps 
not, perhaps not.' 
     `I  don't  like the sound of it at  all,' said Sam. `Sounds too easy at 
any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded  too. 
Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught  
a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply. 

####-     'Is  it not guarded? ' asked Frodo sternly. `And did you escape out  of 
the  darkness,  Smjagol? Were you  not rather  permitted  to  depart upon an 
errand? That at  least is w hat Aragorn  thought,  who found you by the Dead 
Marshes some years ago.' 
     'It's  a lie! ' hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into  his eyes at 
the  naming of Aragorn. `He lied on me, yes he did. I did  escape, all by my 
poor  self.  Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I have searched 
and searched, of course I have. But not for the  Black One. The Precious was 
ours, it was mine I tell you. I did escape.' 
     Frodo felt a  strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once 
not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he had somehow found a 
way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it was by his own cunning. For  
one thing,  he noted  that Gollum used  I, and that  seemed usually to be  a  
sign, on its rare appearances. that some remnants of old truth and sincerity 
were  for  the moment on top. But even  if Gollum  could  be trusted on this 
point, Frodo did not forget the wiles  of the  Enemy. The 'escape' may  have  
been allowed  or arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case 
Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back. 
     'I ask you again,' he said: `is not this secret way guarded? ' 
     But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen  mood. He had  all 
the injured air of a liar suspected when for once  he has told the truth. or  
part of it. He did not answer. 
     'Is it not guarded? ' Frodo repeated. 
     `Yes, yes,  perhaps.  No safe places  in  this  country,'  said  Gollum 
sulkily.  'No safe  places. But  master must try it or  go home.  . No other  
way.' They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous place and 
the high pass he could not tell, or would not. 
     Its  name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful  rumour.  Aragorn  could  
perhaps have told them that name  and its  significance: Gandalf  would have 
warned  them. But they  were  alone, and Aragorn was  far away, and  Gandalf 
stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman, delayed by treason. 
Yet even  as he spoke his last words to Saruman, and the palantnr crashed in 
fire upon the steps of Orthanc. his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, 
over the long leagues his mind sought for them in hope and pity. 
     Maybe Frodo  felt  it,  not knowing it, as he  had upon Amon  Hen, even 
though he believed that Gandalf was  gone, gone  for ever into the shadow in 
Moria far  away. He  sat upon the ground for a long while, silent, his  head 

####-bowed, striving  to recall  all that Gandalf had  said to him. But  for this 
choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed Gandalf's guidance had  been taken 
from them too  soon, too  soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away. 
How they should enter it at the last  Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could 
not say. Into the stronghold of  the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he 
had  once  ventured.  But  into  Mordor,  to  the Mountain  of  Fire and  to 
Barad-dyr, since the Dark Lord  rose in power again, had  he ever   journeyed 
there?  Frodo did not think  so. And here he was  a little halfling from the 
Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where 
the  great ones could  not go, or dared not go. It was an evil  fate. But he 
had  taken it   on himself in his  own sitting-room in the far-off spring  of 
another  year,  so remote now that it was like a chapter  in a story  of the 
world's  youth, when the Trees  of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This 
was  an evil choice. Which way should  he choose? And if both  led to terror  
and death, what good lay in choice?  
     The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little  grey hollow where 
they lay,  so  near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could 
be felt, as if it  were a  thick veil that cut  them off from all the  world 
about them. Above them was a dome  of pale sky  barred  with fleeting smoke, 
but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy 
with brooding thought. 
     Not even an eagle  poised  against the sun would have marked the hobbits 
sitting there, under  the weight of doom, silent, 袖 not moving, shrouded  in 
their  thin  grey  cloaks. For a moment he  might  have  paused  to consider  
Gollum,  a  tiny  figure sprawling  on  the ground:  there  perhaps  lay the 
famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to  
it, its long arms and legs almost bone -white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a  
peck. 
     Frodo's head  was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands 
behind  his head, staring  out of his hood at the empty sky.  At least for a  
long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a  dark bird-like 
figure wheel into the circle of his  sight, and hover, and  then wheel  away 
again.  Two more followed,  and then a fourth. They were very  small to look 
at,  yet  he knew,  somehow, that  they  were huge,  with a  vast stretch of 
pinion,  flying  at a great height.  He covered his eyes and  bent  forward, 
cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of 
the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind 

####-and the shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling: 
the menace  was  more  remote.  But menace  it was. Frodo  felt it  too. His 
thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not look up.  Gollum 
huddled  himself together like a cornered spider. The winged shapes wheeled, 
and stooped swiftly down, speeding back to Mordor. 
     Sam took a deep breath. `The Riders are a bout again, up in the air,' he 
said in a hoarse whisper. 'I saw them. Do you think they  could see us? They 
were very  high up. And if  they are Black Riders same as  before, then they 
can't see much by daylight, can they?  ' 
     'No, perhaps not,' said Frodo.  `But their steeds  could see. And these 
winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably  see more than any 
other  creature.  They are like great  carrion birds. They  are  looking for  
something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.' 
     The feeling of dread passed, but the enfolding  silence was broken. For  
some  time  they had been cut  off  from  the  world, as if  in an invisible 
island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned.  But  still Frodo 
did not  speak to Gollum or make h is choice. His eyes were closed, as if  he 
were dreaming, or looking  inward into his  heart  and memory.  At  last  he 
stirred  and  stood up,  and  it seemed that  he was  about to  speak and to 
decide. But `hark!' he said. `What is that?' 
     A new  fear  was upon  them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At 
first it seemed a long way off,  but it drew  nearer:  it was coming towards 
them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black Wings had spied them and 
had sent armed soldiers to seize  them: no speed seemed too great  for these 
terrible servants of Sauron.  They  crouched, listening.  The voices and the 
clink  of weapons and harness were very close.  Frodo and Sam loosened their 
small swords in their sheaths. Flight was impossible. 
     Gollum  rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the  lip of  the hollow. 
Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch,  until he could peer over it 
between  two  broken points of stone. He remained there without  moving  for  
some time, making no sound.  Presen tly the voices began to recede again, and 
then they slowly faded away. Far off  a  horn  blew on  the ramparts of  the 
Morannon. Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow.  
     'More  Men  going to Mordor,' he said in a low  voice. `Dark faces.  We 
have not seen Men like  these before, no, Smjagol has not.  They are fierce. 
They have  black  eyes, and long  black hair, and gold rings in  their ears;  
yes, lots  of beautiful gold. And  some have  red paint on their cheeks, and 

####-red cloaks;  and their  flags are red, and the tips of their spears; and they 
have round shields,  yellow and black with big  spikes. Not nice; very cruel 
wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Smjagol 
thinks 
they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end:  they came  up 
that  road. They have passed  on  to the  Black Gate; but  more may  follow.  
Always  more  people  coming  to Mordor.  One  day  all the peoples  will be 
inside.' 
     `Were there any oliphaunts?' asked  Sam,  forgetting his  fear  in  his 
eagerness for news of strange places.  
     `No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum. 
     Sam stood up, putting his hands  behind his back (as he always did when  
'speaking poetry'), and began: 
     Grey as a mouse, 
     Big as a house. 
     Nose like a snake, 
     I make the earth shake, 
     As I tramp through the grass; 
     Trees crack as I pass. 
     With horns in my mouth  
     I walk in the South, 
     Flapping big ears. 
     Beyond count of years 
     I stump round and round, 
     Never lie on the ground, 
     Not even to die. 
     Oliphaunt am I, 
     Biggest of all, 
     Huge, old, and tall. 
     If ever you'd met me 
     You wouldn't forget me. 
     If you never do, 
     You won't think I'm true; 
     But old O liphaunt am I, 
     And I never lie. 
     'That,'  said Sam, when he  had finished  reciting, `that's a rhyme  we 
have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too, 

####-and news out of the South, you know.  In the old days hobbits used  to go on 
their travels now and again. Not that many ever came back,  and not that all 
they said  was believed: news from Bree,  and not sure  as Shiretalk , as the 
sayings  go. But I've heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands.  
Swertings we call 'em in our tales;  and they ride on oliphaunts, 'tis said, 
when they fight. They put houses and towers  on  the oliphauntses backs  and 
all,  and  the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So  when you  
said  "Men out of the  South, all  in red and gold;" I said  "were there any 
oliphaunts? " For if there was, I was going to  take a look, risk or no. But 
now I don't suppose I'll ever see  an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain't no such a  
beast.' He sighed. 
     `No, no oliphaunts,' said Gollum again.   'Smjagol has not heard of them. 
He does not want to see them. He does not want  them to be. Smjagol wants to 
go away from here and hide somewhere safer. Smjagol wants master to go. 
Nice 
master, won't he come with Smjagol? ' 
     Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst  of  all his cares when Sam 
trotted out the old fireside rhyme  of Oliphaunt, and the laugh had released 
him from hesitation. `I  wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a 
white one at their head,' he  said.  `Then  we'd break  a way into this evil 
land,  perhaps.  But  we've not; just our  own tired legs, that's all. Well, 
Smjagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.' 
     'Good  master,  wise master,  nice master!'  cried  Gollum in  delight, 
patting Frodo's knees. `Good master! Then rest  now, nice hobbits, under the 
shadow of  the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till  the 
Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft  and quick as shadows 
we 
must be!' 

####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit 

 
 
     For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into 
the shade as the sun moved, until  at last the shadow of the western  rim of 
their  dell grew long, and darkness filled all  the hollow. Then they ate  a  
little,  and drank  sparingly.  Gollum  ate nothing, but  he  accepted water  
gladly. 
     `Soon get more now,' he said, licking  his lips. `Good water  runs down 
in  streams to  the Great River,  nice water in the lands  we are  going to. 
Smjagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes, gollum! ' He 
set his two large flat hands on his  shrunken belly, and a pale  green light 
came into his eyes. 
     The  dusk was deep  when at length  they  set  out,  creeping over  the 
westward rim of the  dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken country on 
the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it  
did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the  early night 
was very dark. A single red light burned high up in the Tower s of the Teeth,  
but  otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch  on the 
Morannon. 
     For  many  miles the red eye  seemed  to  stare at  them as they  fled, 
stumbling through a barren  stony country.  They did not dare  to  take  the 
road, but they  kept  it  on their left, following its line as  well as they 
could at a little distance.  At last, when  night  was growing old and  they 
were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled  
to a small fiery point a nd then vanished: they had turned the dark  northern 
shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards. 
     With hearts  strangely  lightened they  now rested again, but  not  for  
long. They were  not going  quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was 
nearly thirty leagues from the  Morannon to the cross-roads above Osgiliath, 
and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled 
on once  more,  until the  dawn  began  to  spread  slowly in the wide  grey 
solitude. They had then  walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits  could 
not have gone any further, even if they had dared. 
     The  growing  light revealed to them  a  land already, less  barren and 
ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their  left, but near at 
hand  they could  see the southward road,  now  bearing away  from the black 

####-roots of the  hills and  slanting  westwards.  Beyond it were slopes covered 
with  sombre trees  like  dark clouds. but  all about  them  lay  a  tumbled 
heathland, grown with ling and broom  and cornel, and other shrubs that they 
did not know. Here and there they saw knots  of tall pine-trees.  The hearts 
of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness: the  air was fresh 
and  fragrant, and it reminded them  of the uplands of the Northfarthing far 
away. It seemed good to be reprieved, to  walk in a land that had  only been 
for a few years  under the dominion of  the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen 
wholly into  decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate 
that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy heights. 
They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes 
while the light lasted. 
     The  day passed uneasily. They lay deep  in the heather and counted out 
the  slow hours, in which  there seemed  little  change; for they were still 
under the shadows of the Ephel D速ath, and the sun was veiled. Frodo slept at 
times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble 
about him; but Sam found it difficult to do more than doze, even when Gollum 
was plainly fast  asleep,  whiffling  and twitching in  his  secret  dreams.  
Hunger,  perhaps,  more than mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long 
for a good homely meal, `something hot out of the pot'. 
     As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming night, they 
started  out  again. In  a little while  Gollum led  them  down  on  to  the 
southward road; and after that they went  on more quickly, though the danger 
was greater. Their ears were strained  for the sound of hoof or  foot on the 
road  ahead, or following them  from behind;  but the night passed, and they 
heard no sound of walker or rider. 
     The  road had been made in  a long lost  time:  and  for perhaps thirty 
miles below  the  Morannon it had been  newly repaired, but as it went south  
the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen 
in its straight sure  flight and level course:  now and again it cut its way 
through hillside slopes, or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of 
enduring masonry; but at  last  all signs  of stonework faded,  save  for  a  
broken pillar  here and  there,  peering out of bushes  at  the side, or old 
paving-stones still  lurking  amid weeds  and  moss.  Heather  and  trees and 
bracken  scrambled down  and  overhung  the banks, or sprawled out over  the 
surface. It dwindled at last to a country cart -road little  used; but it did 
not wind:  it held on its  own sure course and  guided them by  the swiftest  

####-way. 
     So  they  passed into the  northern marches  of that land that Men once 
called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift -falling streams.  
The  night  became  fine  under  star and round moon, and  it seemed  to the 
hobbits that the  fragrance  of the air grew as they went  forward; and from 
the  blowing and muttering of Gollum it  seemed that he noticed it  too, and 
did not relish it. At the first signs  of day  they halted  again.  They had 
come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer -sided in  the middle,  by 
which the road clove its way through a stony  ridge. Now they climbed up the 
westward bank and looked abroad. 
     Day  was  opening in the sky, and they saw  that the mountains were now  
much further  off, receding ea stward in  a long curve  that was lost in  the 
distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran  down into dim 
hazes far  below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and 
cedar  and cypress. and other  kinds  unknown in the Shire, with wide glades 
among them; and  everywhere there was a wealth  of sweet -smelling  herbs and 
shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of  their 
own  land,  but not until now in this more sheltered region had the  hobbits 
felt the change of clime.  Here Spring was  already busy about them:  fronds 
pierced  moss  and mould,  larches were  green-fingered, small flowers  were 
opening in the turf,  birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now 
desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.  
     South  and  west  it looked  towards  the  warm lower vales  of Anduin, 
shielded  from   the  east  by  the  Ephel  D速ath  and  yet  not  under  the 
mountain-shadow,  protected  from the north  by the  Emyn Muil, open  to the 
southern  airs and the moist winds from the Sea far  away.  Many great trees 
grew there,  planted  long ago,  falling  into untended age amid a  riot  of 
careless descendants;  and groves and  thickets there  were of tamarisk  and 
pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles; 
and  thymes that grew in  bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled 
in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue 
flowers, or  red,  or pale green; and  marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys,  
and many  herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots 
and  rocky  walls were  already  starred  with  saxifrages  and  stonecrops.  
Primeroles  and anemones were awake in the  filbert -brakes; and asphodel and 
many  lily-flowers  nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep  green 
grass beside  the pools,  where  falling streams  halted  in cool hollows on 

####-their journey down to Anduin. 
     The  travellers  turned their backs on the road and  went downhill.  As 
they walked, brushing their  way through bush  and herb,  sweet  odours rose 
about  them. Gollum coughed and retched; but the hobbits  breathed deep, and 
suddenly Sam laughed, for heart's ease not for jest. They followed a  stream 
that went  quickly down before them. Presently  it  brought them to a  small 
clear lake in a shallow dell: it lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone 
basin, the carven rim of  which was  almost wholly  covered  with mosses and 
rose-brambles;  iris-swords stood in  ranks about it. and water -lily  leaves 
floated on  its dark gently-rippling surface; but it was deep and fresh, and 
spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end. 
     Here they washed  themselves and  drank  their  fill at  the in-falling 
freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place: for  this 
land, fair-seeming  still, was nonetheless now territory of  the Enemy. They 
had not come  very far from the road, and yet even  in so short a space they 
had seen  scars of  the  old wars, and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and 
other foul servants of the Dark Lord:  a  pit of uncovered filth and refuse; 
trees hewn down wantonly  and  left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign 
of the Eye cut in rude strokes on their bark. 
     Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the 
unfamiliar  plants  and  trees,  forgetful for  the moment  of  Mordor,  was 
reminded suddenly  of their ever -present peril. He  stumbled on a ring still 
scorched by fire,  and in the midst of it  he  found  a pile  of charred and 
broken  bones  and skulls.  The  swift growth  of the wild  with  briar  and 
eglantine and trailing  clematis was already drawing a veil  over this place 
of dreadful feast and slaughter;  but it was not ancient. He hurried back to  
his companions, but he said nothing: the bones  were best  left in peace and 
not pawed and routed by Gollum. 
     `Let's  find a place to lie up in,' he said. 'Not lower down. Higher up 
for me.' 
     A  little way back above the lake they found a  deep brown bed  of last  
year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved  bay-trees climbing up a  
steep bank  that was crowned with old cedars. Here they  decided to rest and 
pass  the day, which already promised to be  bright and warm. A good day for 
strolling  on their way along the groves and glades of Ithilien; but  though 
Orcs may shun the sunlight. there were too many places here where they could 
lie hid  and  watch;  and  other  evil  eyes were  abroad:  Sauron had  many 

####-servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under  the  Yellow. Face. Soon 
it  would look over the dark  ridges of the Ephel D速ath, and he would  faint 
and cower in the light and heat. 
     Sam had  been giving earnest thought to food as they  marched. Now that 
the despair  of  the  impassable Gate was behind  him,  he did  not feel  so 
inclined as his master  to take no thought  for  their livelihood beyond the 
end of their errand;  and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread 
of the  Elves for worse times ahead.  Six  days or more had  passed since he 
reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks. 
     'If we  reach the Fire in  that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he 
thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! ' 
     Besides,  at  the  end  of a  long  night -march, and  after bathing and 
drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper,  or a breakfast, by 
the fire  in  the old kitchen  at  Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An  
idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun  to sneak off 
on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern. 
     `Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going?  Hunting? Well see here, 
old  noser, you don't like our  food,  and I'd  not  be sorry  for  a change 
myself.  Your new motto's always ready to help . Could you find anything  fit 
for a hungry hobbit? ' 
     `Yes, perhaps,  yes,' said Gollum. `Smjagol always helps, if they  asks 
-- if they asks nicely.' 
     `Right!' said Sam `I does ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I begs.' 
     Gollum disappeared.  He  was away some  time, and  Frodo  after  a  few 
mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown  fern and went to sleep. Sam 
looked  at  him. The early  daylight  was only just creeping  down into  the 
shadows u nder the trees, but he saw his master's face very clearly, and  his 
hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly 
of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in  the  house of Elrond,  after his  deadly 
wound. Then as  he  had  kept watch Sam  had  noticed that at times  a light 
seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light  was even clearer and  
stronger. Frodo's face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it; 
but it looked old,  old and beautiful, as  if the  chiselling of the shaping 
years was now revealed  in  many  fine lines  that  had before  been hidden, 
though the  identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it 
that  way to himself.  He shook  his  head, as if finding words useless, and 
murmured:  `I  love  him. He's  like that, and  sometimes it shines through, 

####-somehow. But I love him, whether or no.' 
     Gollum returned quietly  and  peered over  Sam's  shoulder.  Looking at 
Frodo, he shut his eyes  and crawled away without a sound. Sam came  to him a  
moment later and found him  chewing something  and muttering  to himself. 
On 
the ground beside him lay two small rabbits, which he was  beginning to  eye 
greedily. 
     'Smjagol always helps,' he said. `He has brought rabbits, nice rabbits.  
But ma ster has gone  to sleep,  and perhaps Sam wants to sleep. Doesn't want 
rabbits now?  Smjagol  tries  to help,  but he can't catch  things all in  a  
minute.' 
     Sam,  however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least 
not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of  course,  can cook, for they  begin to 
learn the art before their letters (which  many never reach):  but Sam was a  
good  cook, even by  hobbit  reckoning,  and he had  done a good deal of the 
camp-cooking on their travels, when there was a  chance. He  still  hopefully 
carried some of his gear in his pack: a  small tinder -box, two small shallow 
pans,  the smaller fitting into  the  larger; inside them  a wooden spoon, a  
short  two-pronged  fork and  some skewers were  stowed;  and hidden  at the 
bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But 
he needed a  fire, and other things besides. He thought for  a bit, while he 
took out his  knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the rabbits.  
He was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few minutes. 
     'Now,  Gollum,'  he said, 'I've  another job for you. Go and fill these 
pans with water, and bring  'em back!  ' 
     'Smjagol will fetch water, yes,' said Gollum. 'But what does the hobbit 
want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.' 
     'Never you mind,' said Sam. `If you  can't guess, you'll soon find out. 
And  the  sooner you fetch the  water,  the  sooner you'll  learn. Don't you  
damage one of my pans, or I'll carve you into mincemeat.' 
     While Gollum was  away Sam took  another look  at Frodo.  He  was still 
sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck  most  by the leanness  of his face 
and hands. 'Too thin and drawn he is,' he muttered. 'Not right for a hobbit. 
If I can get these coneys cooked, I'm going to wake him up.' 
     Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled  up the bank  
collecting a  bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen branch of a  cedar 
at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves at the foot of the 

####-bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid  his fuel 
in it. Being handy with flint and tinder he soon had a small blaze going. It  
made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping  
over  his  fire,   shielding it and  building  it up with heavier  wood, when 
Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.  
     He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave 
a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss 
-- no!' he cried. `No! Silly  hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do 
it!' 
     `Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise. 
     `Not make  the nassty  red  tongues,'  hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's 
dangerous, yes it is.  It burns, it kills. And it will  bring enemies, yes it 
will.' 
     'I don't think so,' said  Sam. `Don't see  why it  should, if you don't 
put wet stuff on it and make a  smother.  But if it does, it does. I'm going 
to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.' 
     'Stew the rabbits!'  squealed Gollum in  dismay. `Spoil  beautiful meat 
Smjagol  saved for  you,  poor  hungry  Smjagol! What for? What  for,  silly 
hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!' 
He clawed a t the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire. 
     `Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes  you, 
and raw  coney chokes me. If you give  me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to 
cook,  if  I have  a mind. And  I have.  You needn't watch me.  Go and catch  
another  and eat it as you  fancy  -- somewhere private  and out o' my sight. 
Then you  won't see the  fire, and  I shan't see you, and we'll both  be the 
happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.' 
     Gollum withdrew grumbling,  and  crawled  into  the  fern.  Sam  busied 
himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself,  
`is some  herbs and roots,  especially taters -- not to mention bread. Herbs 
we can manage, seemingly.' 
     `Gollum!'  he  called softly. `Third  time pays  for all. I  want  some 
herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the  fern,  but  his looks  were neither  
helpful  nor friendly.  `A few  bay-leaves, some  thyme and sage, will do  -- 
before the water boils,' said Sam. 
     `No! ' said  Gollum. `Smjagol is  not pleased. And Smjagol doesn't like 
smelly leaves. He doesn't eat  grasses or roots,  no precious, not till he's 
starving or very sick, poor Smjagol. ' 

####-     `Smjagol'll get  into real true hot water , when this water boils, if he 
don't do  as  he's  asked,' growled  Sam.  `Sam'll put  his head in it,  yes 
precious. And I'd make him look for turnips  and carrots, and taters too, if 
it was  the time o'  the  year. I'll bet there's all sorts  of  good  things 
running wild in this country. I'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.' 
     `Smjagol won't  go, O no precious, not this time,' hissed Gollum. `He's 
frightened, and  he's very tired, and this hobbit's  not nice,  not nice  at 
all.  Smjagol won't  grub for roots and  carrotses  and  --  taters.  What's 
taters, precious, eh, what's taters?  
     `Po-ta -toes,' said Sam. 'The  Gaffer's delight, and  rare  good ballast  
for an empty belly. But you won't find any, so you needn't look. But be good  
Smjagol  and  fetch me the herbs, and I'll think better of you. What's more, 
if you turn  over a new leaf, and keep it turned, I'll cook you  some taters 
one of  these days. I will: fried fish  and chips served by  S.  Gamgee. You  
couldn't say no to that.' 
     `Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish now, 
and keep nassty chips! ' 
     `Oh you're hopeless,' said Sam. 'Go to sleep!' 
     In  the end he had to find what  he wanted for himself;  but he did not 
have to  go far, not out  of sight of the  place where his master lay, still 
sleeping. For a while  Sam sat musing, and  tending the fire till  the water  
boiled. The daylight grew  and the  air became  warm; the dew faded off turf 
and leaf. Soon  the  rabbits  cut  up  lay simmering in their pans with  the 
bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the  time went by. He let them stew 
for close on an hour, testing them now and again with  his fork, and tasting 
the broth. 
     When  he thought  all  was ready he lifted the pans off  the  fire, and 
crept along to Frodo. Frodo  half opened his eyes as Sam stood over him, and 
then he  wakened from  his  dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of 
peace. 
     `Hullo, Sam! ' he said. `Not resting? Is  anything wrong?  What  is the 
time?  ' 
     `About a couple of hours after daybreak,' said  Sam, `and  nigh on half 
past  eight  by  Shire  clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Though  it ain't  
quite what I'd call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I've got a bit of 
a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo.  Do you good. You'll have  to sup 
it in your mug; or straight from the pan, when it's  cooled a bit. I haven't  

####-brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.' 
     Frodo  yawned and stretched.  'You  should  have been  resting Sam,' he 
said. 'And lighting   a fire  was dangerous  in these  parts.  But I do  feel 
hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? ' 
     'A  present from Smjagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I 
fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a 
few herbs.' 
     Sam and  his master sat just within  the  fern-brake and ate their stew 
from the pans, sharing the  old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half 
a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast. 
     'Wheew!  Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time 
to  change your  mind.  There's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.' 
There was no answer. 
     `Oh  well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll 
finish it,' said Sam. 
     `And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo. 
     `Don't you drop off, while  I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo. I  don't  feel  too 
sure  of  him.  There's  a  good  deal  of  Stinker -the bad  Gollum, if  you  
understand me-in him still, and it's getting stronger again. Not but what  I 
think he'd try to throttle  me first  now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's 
not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.' 
     They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his  gear. As he 
stood  up to return, he looked back up the  slope. At that moment he saw the 
sun  rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that 
lay  ever to the east, and it sent its  golden beams down upon the trees and 
glades about him. Then  he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey,  smoke, plain 
to see as it  caught  the sunlight, rising  from a thicket above him. With a  
shock  he realized that  this was the smoke  from  his  little cooking-fire, 
which he had neglected to put out. 
     `That won't do! Never thought  it  would show like that! ' he muttered, 
and  he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard 
a whistle  or not? Or was  it the  call of some strange  bird?  If it was  a  
whistle, it did  not  come from Frodo's direction. There it went again  from 
another place! Sam began to run as well as he could uphill. 
     He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled 
some  fern  at  the edge  of the fire,  and the fern blazing  up had set the 
turves  smouldering.  Hastily he stamped  out  what  was left of  the  fire, 

####-scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole.  Then he crept back to 
Frodo. 
     'Did  you hear a whistle, and  what sounded like an answer? ' he asked. 
`A few minutes back. I hope  it was  only a bird,  but it didn't  sound quite 
like that: more like  somebody mimicking  a  bird-call, I  thought.  And I'm 
afraid my bit of fire's been smoking. Now if I've gone  and brought trouble, 
I'll never forgive myself. Nor won't have a chance, maybe! ' 
     `Hush! ' whispered Frodo. `I thought I heard voices.' 
     The  two  hobbits  trussed their  small packs,  put  them  on ready for  
flight,  and  then  crawled  deeper  into  the  fern.  There  they  crouched 
listening. 
     There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and furtively,  
but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly 
close at hand. 
     `Here! Here is where the smoke came from! ' it said. `'Twill be nigh at 
hand. In the fern, no  doubt. We shall have it like  a coney in a trap. Then 
we shall learn what kind of thing it is.' 
     `Aye, and what it knows! ' said a second voice. 
     At  once  four  men  came  striding  through  the  fern from  different 
directions. Since flight and hiding  were no longer  possible, Frodo and Sam 
sprang  to their  feet,  putting  back to back and whipping out  their small 
swords. 
     If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even  more 
astonished.  Four tall Men  stood there. Two  had spears in their hands with 
broad  bright heads. Two  had great bows,  almost of their  own height,  and  
great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had swords at their sides,  
and were clad in green  and  brown of varied hues, as if the better  to walk  
unseen in the glades of Ithilien. Green  gauntlets covered  their hands, and 
their faces were hooded and  masked with green, except for their eyes, which 
were very keen and bright. At once  Frodo thought of  Boromir, for these Men 
were like him in stature and bearing, a nd in their manner of speech. 
     `We have  not found what we sought,' said one. `But what have we found? 
' 
     'Not Orcs,' said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had 
seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand. 
     `Elves? ' said a third, doubtfully. 
     `Nay! Not Elves,'  said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared the 

####-chief among them. `Elves do not  walk in Ithilien in these  days.  And Elves  
are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.' 
     'Meaning  we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when  
you've finished discussing us,  perhaps you'll say who you are, and  why you  
can't let two tired travellers rest.' 
     The tall  green man laughed grimly.  `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,' 
he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the 
Dark Tower, or of the White.' 
     `But  we are  neither,' said Frodo.  `And  travellers  we are, whatever  
Captain Faramir may say.' 
     'Then make  haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir. 
'We  have  a  work  to  do,  and this is  no time or place  for riddling  or  
parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? ' 
     `The third? ' 
     'Yes, the skulking fellow that  we saw with his  nose in  the pool down 
yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a  
creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.' 
     'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion 
met  upon our road; and I  am  not answerable for  him. If you  come on him, 
spare  him. Bring him  or send him  to  us.  He is  only  a wretched gangrel 
creature, but I have  him under my care for a while. But as for  us,  we are 
Hobbits of the Shire,  far to  the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo 
son of Drogo is my name, and with  me is  Samwise son  of Hamfast, a  worthy 
hobbit in my  service.  We  have come  by long ways  --  out of Rivendell, or  
Imladris as some call  it.'  Here  Faramir started  and grew  intent. 'Seven 
companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left  at  Parth Galen 
above Rauros:  two of  my kin; a  Dwarf there was also,  and an Elf, and two  
Men.  They were  Aragorn;  and Boromir, who said  that he came out of  Minas 
Tirith, a city in the South.' 
     'Boromir! ' all the four men exclaimed. 
     'Boromir son of  the Lord Denethor?' said  Faramir, and a strange stern 
look came into his  face. 'You came with  him? That is news indeed, if it be 
true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir  son of Denethor was High  Warden 
of  the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are 
you then,  and  what had you  to do  with  him?  Be swift, for  the  Sun  is 
climbing!' 
     'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell?  

####-' Frodo replied. 
     Seek for the Sword that was Broken. 
     In Imladris it dwells. 
     'The words are known indeed,' said Faramir in astonishment. `It is some 
token of your truth that you also know them.' 
     `Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,' said 
Frodo. 'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.' 
     `That I see,' said Faramir thoughtfully. `Or I see that it might be so. 
And what is Isildur's Bane? ' 
     `That is hidden,'  answered  Frodo. `Doubtless it will be made clear in 
time.' 
     `We must  learn more of this,' said Faramir, `and know  what brings you  
so far east under the shadow of yonder --,' he pointed and said no name. 'But 
not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril.  and you would not have 
gone far  by field or road this day.  There will be hard handstrokes nigh at 
hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will 
leave two to guard you, for your  good and for mine. Wise  man trusts not to 
chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with 
you.' 
     'Farewell!' said Frodo, bowing low. `Think what you will, I am a friend 
of  all enemies of the One Enemy. We  would go with you, if we halfling folk 
could hope to serve  you, such doughty men and strong  as you seem, and if my 
errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!' 
     'The  Halflings  are  courteous  folk,  whatever  else  they  be,' said 
Faramir. `Farewell!' 
     The hobbits  sat  down  again, but  they said nothing to one another of 
their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just  under the dappling  shadow of the 
dark bay-trees, two men remained on guard. They took off their masks now and 
again  to cool them,  as the  day-heat grew,  and Frodo  saw that  they were 
goodly  men, pale-skinned, dark of hair, with  grey eyes and  faces sad  and 
proud. They spoke together in soft voices, at first using the Common Speech, 
but after the manner of older days, and then changing to another language of 
their own. To his amazement, as he listened Frodo   became aware that  it was 
the Elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he looked 
at  them with wonder, for he  knew  then that  they must be D速nedain  of the 
South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse. 
     After a  while  he spoke to  them; but they were slow  and  cautious in 

####-answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor, 
and 
they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they  were descended  from folk who lived 
in Ithilien  at  one time, before  it  was overrun. From  such  men the Lord 
Denethor chose his forayers, who  crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where, 
they would not say) to harry  the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between 
the Ephel D速ath and the River. 
     `It  is close on  ten leagues hence to the east -shore of Anduin,'  said 
Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this 
journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! ' 
     'Aye, curse the Southrons! ' said Damrod.  ` 'Tis  said that there were 
dealings  of  old between Gondor  and the kingdoms of the  Harad in  the Far 
South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away 
south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest  of  their realms,  
acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of  Men since 
any passed to or  fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy 
has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they 
were 
ever ready to His  will -as have so many also  in the East .  I doubt not that 
the days of Gondor are numbered, and the  walls of Minas Tirith are  doomed, 
so great is His strength and malice.' 
     `But still we will not sit idle  and  let Him do all as He would,' said 
Mablung. `These cursed Southrons  come  now marching up the ancient roads 
to 
swell the hosts of  the Dark Tower.  Yea, up  the very roads  that  craft of 
Gondor made.  And they go  ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the 
power of their new  master is great enough, so that the mere shadow  of  His 
hills  will  protect  them.  We  come  to teach  them  another lesson. Great 
strength of them was  reported  to us  some days ago, marching north. One of 
their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on 
the road  above, where it passes through  the cloven way. The road may pass, 
but  they  shall  not! Not  while Faramir  is Captain.  He  leads now in all 
perilous  ventures.  But his life is charmed, or fate  spares him  for  some 
other end.' 
     Their talk  died down into a listening silence.  All  seemed  still and 
watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered  out. With his 

####-keen hobbit-eyes  he  saw that many  more Men were about. He  could see 
them 
stealing up the slopes, singly or in long files, keeping always to the shade 
of  grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly visible  in their brown and  green 
raiment, through  grass and  brake. All were  hooded  and  masked,  and  had 
gauntlets on  their hands, and  were  armed like Faramir and his companions. 
Before  long they had  all passed and  vanished. The sun rose till it neared 
the South. The shadows shrank. 
     `I wonder where that dratted Gollum is?  '  thought Sam, as  he crawled 
back into deeper shade. `He  stands  a fair chance of being spitted  for  an 
Orc,  or of being roasted  by the Yellow Face. But I  fancy he'll look after  
himself.' He lay down beside Frodo and began to doze. 
     He woke,  thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up.  It  was 
now high noon.  The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees.  
Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond  mistake from  above, over the 
top  of  the slope. Sam thought that he heard cries and wild  shouting also, 
but  the sound was faint,  as  if  it came out  of some  distant  cave. Then 
presently the noise of  fighting broke  out  near at hand, just  above their 
hiding-place. He could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel, the 
clang  of sword on iron  cap, the  dull beat of blade on  shield;  men  were 
yelling and screaming, and one clear loud voice was calling Gondor! Gondor! 
     `It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,' said Sam 
to Frodo. 'They're as near as I want them now.' 
     But the noise grew closer. `They are  coming!' cried Damrod. `See! Some 
of  the Southrons have broken  from the trap  and are flying  from the road. 
There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain leading.' 
     Sam,  eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He scrambled a 
little  way  up into one of  the  larger of the bay-trees. For  a  moment he 
caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running  down the slope  some way off 
with green-clad warriors leaping after them, hewing them down  as they fled. 
Arrows  were thick in the air. Then suddenly straight over  the rim of their 
sheltering bank, a man fell, crashing through  the slender trees,  nearly on 
top of them. He came to  rest in the  fern a  few feet away,  face downward, 
green arrow-feathers  sticking from  his neck  below  a  golden collar.  His 
scarlet robes  were tattered, his  corslet of overlapping brazen  plates was 
rent and hewn, his black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with 
blood. His brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword. 

####-     It was Sam's  first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not 
like it much. He was  glad that he could not see the dead  face. He wondered 
what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of 
heart, or what lies or threats had  led him on the long march from his home; 
and if  he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash 
of  thought which  was  quickly driven  from his mind. For  just as  Mablung 
stepped towards the  fallen  body, there was a  new noise.  Great crying and 
shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting.  And  then a  
great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground. 
     'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod  to his  companion. 'May the Valar turn  him 
aside! Mymak! Mymak!' 
     To his  astonishment and terror,  and lasting delight,  Sam  saw a vast  
shape crash out of  the trees  and come careering down the  slope. Big as  a  
house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving  hill.  
Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the  Mymak of 
Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now 
in Middle-earth; his kin that  live still in latter days are but memories of 
his girth and majesty. On  he came, straight towards  the watchers, and then 
swerved  aside in the nick of time,  passing only  a few yards away, rocking  
the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like 
ears  spread out, long  snout upraised like a huge serpent  about to strike. 
his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands 
of  gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of  scarlet and  gold flapped 
about him in wild tatters. The  ruins  of  what seemed a very war -tower  lay 
upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage thr ough the woods; and 
high upon  his  neck still desperately clung a  tiny  figure-the  body  of a  
mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings. 
     On the great  beast  thundered, blundering  in blind wrath through pool 
and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about  the triple hide of 
his flanks. Men of  both sides  fled before him,  but  many  he overtook and 
crushed  to  the  ground. Soon he was lost  to  view, still  trumpeting  and 
stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether  he escaped 
to 
roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped 
in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River  
and was swallowed up. 
     Sam drew a  deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it  was!' he said. `S o there are 

####-Oliphaunts, and I have seen one.  What a life! But no one  at home will ever  
believe me. Well, if that's over, I'll have a bit of sleep.' 
     'Sleep while you  may,' said Mablung. `But  the Captain will return, if 
he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued 
as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.' 
     `Go quietly when you must!' said Sam.  `No need  to disturb my sleep. I 
was walking all night.' 
     Mablung  laughed.  `I  do not  think  the Captain will leave you  here, 
Master Samwise,' he said. 'But you shall see.' 
 
