 

 
 
     The sun was sinking  behind the long  western arm of the mounta ins when 
Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from 
Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of 
the 
king's men  went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down 
into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace. 
     Ents in a  solemn  row stood like  statues at the gate, with their long 
arms  uplifted, but they made  no sound. Merry and  Pippin looked back, when 
they had passed some way down the winding road.  Sunlight was  still shining 
in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey  ruins falling into 
darkness. Treebeard stood alone  there now, like the distant stump of an old 
tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon  the  sunny ledge far  
away on the borders of Fangorn. 
     They  came  to the pillar  of  the  White  Hand.  The  pillar was still 
standing,  but the graven hand had  been thrown  down  and broken into small 
pieces. Right in the middle  of the road  the long forefinger lay,  white in 
the dusk, its red nail darkening to black. 
     'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.  
     They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley. 
     'Are we riding far tonight,  Gandalf?'  asked  Merry after  a while. 'I  
don't  know  how you feel with small rag-tag  dangling  behind you; but  the 
rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.' 
     'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no 
longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it  is any comfort  
to your pride,  I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in 
his thoughts than all the rest of us.  Who you are; how  you came there, and 
why; what  you know;  whether you were captured,  and if so, how you escaped 
when all the Orcs perished -- it is with those little riddles that the great 
mind Â¢f Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if 
you feel honoured by his concern.' 
     'Thank  you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your 
tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a  

####-question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?' 
     Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a  
hobbit or two in their care -- to teach them the meaning of the word, and to 
correct them. I  beg your pardon.  But  I have given  thought even to  these 
simple matters.  We will ride for a few  hours, gently, until we come to the 
end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster. 
     'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's 
house  at Edoras over the  plains, a ride  of  some days. But we have  taken 
thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm's  Deep, to 
warn them that  the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with 
many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than 
two 
or  three together are to go openly over the land,  by day or night, when it 
can be avoided.' 
     'Nothing or a double helping is  your way!'  said Merry. 'I am afraid I 
was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Deep and all 
the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.' 
     'Then you'd best learn  something, if you  wish to  understand  what is 
happening.  But  not just  now, and not from  me: I have too  many  pressing 
things to think about.' 
     'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less  testy. But 
why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!' 
     Yes,  we  have  won,  but  only  the first victor  and  that  in itself 
increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mordor, 
which 
I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did 
so.  The Eye  of Barad-dyr will be looking impatiently towards  the Wizard's 
Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.' 
     The road passed  slowly, winding down the valley. Now  further, and now 
nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from the mountains. All 
the mists were gone. A  chill wind blew. The moon, now  waxing round, filled 
the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen.  The  shoulders of  the mountain  to 
their  right  sloped down to bare hills.  The wide plains opened grey before 
them. 
     At  last they halted. Then they turned aside,  leaving the highway  and 
taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or so they came 
to a dale. It  opened southward,  leaning back into the slope  of  round Dol 

####-Baran,  the last  hill of  the northern ranges,  greenfooted,  crowned  with 
heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last  year's bracken,  among  
which the tight -curled  fronds of  spring  were just  thrusting through  the 
sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick  upon the low banks,  and  under  
them they made their camp,  two hours  or so before  the middle of the night.  
They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of  a spreading  hawthorn,  
tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling 
at each twig's tip. 
     Guards were  set,  two at a watch.  The  rest, after  they had  supped, 
wrapped  themselves in a cloak and blanket and  slept. The  hobbits lay in a  
corner by themselves  upon a pile  of old  bracken.  Merry was  sleepy,  but 
Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he 
twisted and turned. 
     'What's the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?' 
     'No,'  said Pippin, 'but  I'm not  comfortable. I wonder how long it is 
since I slept in a bed?' 
     Merry  yawned. 'Work  it out on your fingers!' he said.  'But you  must  
know how long it is since we left Lurien.' 
     'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.' 
     'Well,  Rivendell  then,'  said  Merry.  'But  I could  sleep  anywhere 
tonight.' 
     'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You  
were riding with Gandalf.' 
     'Well, what of it?' 
     'Did you get any news, any information out of him?' 
     'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it: 
you were close by,  and we were talking no secrets. But you  can go with him 
tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.' 
     'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.' 
     'Oh  yes, he is!'  said Merry,  waking  up  a little, and  beginning to 
wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He 
can 
be  both  kinder  and  more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I 
think. He has changed; but  we have not had a chance to see  how  much, yet. 
But th ink of the last part of that  business  with Saruman! Remember Saruman 
was  once Gandalf's superior: head  of  the  Council, whatever  that  may be 

####-exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the  White  now.  Saruman 
came 
when he was told, and  his rod was taken;  and then he was just told  to go, 
and he went!' 
     'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's 
all,' Pippin argued. 'That-glass  ball, now. He seemed mighty  pleased  with 
it. He knows or  guesses something about i t. But does he tell  us  what? No, 
not  a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved  it  from rolling into  a pool. 
Here, I'll take that, my lad -- that's all. I wonder what it  is? It felt so 
very heavy.' Pippin's voice fell very low as if he was talking to h imself.  
     'Hullo!' said  Merry. 'So that's what is bothering you? Now, Pippin  my 
lad, don't  forget Gildor's  saying  --  the one Sam  used to quote:  Do  not 
meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.' 
     'But  our  whole  life for  months  has been  one long meddling  in the 
affairs  of Wizards,' said Pippin.  'I  should like a bit  of information as 
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.' 
     'Go to  sleep!'  said Merry. 'You'll  get information enough, sooner or 
later. My  dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a  Brandybuck for inquisitiveness;  
but is this the time, I ask you?' 
     'All right! What's the harm in my  telling you  what  I should like:  a  
look  at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Ganda lf sitting on it, 
like a hen on an egg. But it doesn't help much to get no more from you  than 
a you-can't-have-it so-go-to-sleep!' 
     'Well, what else could  I say?' said Merry. 'I'm sorry, Pippin, but you  
really must wait  till the  morning.  I'll  be as curious as you  like after  
breakfast, and I'll  help in any  way I can at wizard-wheedling. But I can't  
keep awake  any  longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good  
night!' 
     Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and 
it was not  encouraged by  the  sound of Merry breathing softly, asleep in a  
few minutes  after saying good night. 'The thought of  the dark globe seemed 
to grow stronger as all grew quiet.  Pippin felt  again its  weight  in  his 
hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had  looked for 
a moment. He tossed and turned and tried to think of something else. 
     At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round. It was 
chilly, and he wrapped  his cloak about him.   The  moon was shining cold and 
white, down into  the  dell, and  the shadows of the bushes were black.  All 

####-about lay sleeping shapes. The  two guards were not in view: they were up on 
the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some  impulse that he 
did not understand,  Pippin  walked  softly to  where Gandalf lay. He looked 
down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there 
was a  glitter  of eyes under his long  lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. 
But  Gandalf  made no sign;  and drawn forward once more, half  against  his 
will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard's head. He was rolled 
in  a blanket, with  his cloak  spread over  the  top; and close beside him, 
between his right  side and  his  bent arm,  there was a hummock,  something 
round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off  
it to the ground. 
     Hardly breathing, Pippin  crept nearer, foot by  foot. At last he knelt 
down. Then he put his hands out  stealthily, and slowly  lifted the lump up: 
it did not  seem quite  so heavy as he  had  expected. 'Only some  bundle of 
oddments, perhaps, after all,'  he thought  with  a strange sense of relief;  
but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it . 
Then an idea came into his mind.  He  tiptoed away, found a large stone, and  
came back. 
     Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling 
down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing 
that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and 
dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in 
his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf 
moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed  to be in a strange 
tongue; his hand groped  out  and clasped the  wrapped stone, then he sighed  
and did not move again. 
     'You  idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered  to himself. 'You're going  to get 
yourself into frightful  trouble. Put it back quick!'  But he found now that 
his knees  quaked, and he did not  dare to  go  near enough to the wizard to 
reach  the  bundle.  'I'll never get  it back  now without  waking  him,' he 
thought, 'not till I'm a bit calmer. SÂ¢ I may as well have a look first. Not 
just  here though!'  He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not  far 
from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell. 
     Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball  between  them. He bent 
low over it, looking like a greedy  child stooping over a bowl of food, in a  
corner away from  others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at  it. The  air 
seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet, 

####-with the moonlight gleaming on its surface. Then ther e came a faint glow and 
stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that now he could not look  
away. Soon all  the inside  seemed on fire;  the ball  was spinning,  or the 
lights within were  revolving. Suddenly the lights went out.  He gave a gasp  
and struggled; but  he  remained bent,  clasping the ball  with  both hands.  
Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly 
for a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still. 
     The cry was  piercing. The guards  leapt down from  the banks.  All the 
camp was soon astir. 
     'So this is the thief!' said Gandalf.  Hastily  he cast his  cloak over  
the  globe where  it lay.  'But  you, Pippin!  This is a  grievous  turn  to 
things!' He knelt by  Pippin's body: the hobbit was lying on his back rigid, 
with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. 'The devilry! What mischief has he  
done-to himself, and to all of us?' The wizard's face was drawn and haggard.  
     He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath; 
then he laid  his hands on his brow.  The hobbit shuddered. His eyes closed.  
He cried  out;  and sat  up. staring in bewilderment at all the  faces round 
him, pale in the moonlight. 
     'It is not for you, Saruman!' he  cried in a shrill and toneless  voice 
shrinking away from Gandalf. 'I will send for it at once. Do you understand?  
Say just that!' Then he struggled to get up and escape but Gandalf held  him 
gently and firmly. 
     'Peregrin Took!' he said. 'Come back!' 
     The  hobbit relaxed  and  fell  back,  clinging  to  the wizard's hand. 
'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! Forgive me!' 
     'Forgive you?' said the wizard. 'Tell me first what you have done!' 
     'I, I  took  the  ball  and looked at it,' stammered Pippin; 'and I saw 
things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn't. And then 
he came  and questioned  me; and  he looked  at me, and,  and  that is all I 
remember.' 
     'That won't  do,' said Gandalf sternly. 'What did you see, and what did 
you say?' 
     Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at 
him in  silence, except Merry who turned away. But  Gandalf's face was still  
hard.  'Speak!' he said. 
     In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew 
clearer  and  stronger. 'I saw a  dark sky, and tall battlements,' he  said. 

####-'And tiny  stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and  clear. 
Then the stars went in and out-they were  cut off by things with wings. Very 
big, I think, really; but  in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round 
the tower. I  thought  there  were nine of them.  One  began to fly straight 
towards  me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible -- no, no! I can't  
say. 
     'I tried to get  away, because I thought  it would fly out; but when it 
had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not speak so  
that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood. 
     '"So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?" 
     'I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer,  but 
it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit." 
     'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. 
It was like being  stabbed with knives. I struggled.  But  he sa id: "Wait  a  
moment!  We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman  that this dainty is not for  
him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!" 
     'Then  he gloated over me. I felt  I was  falling  to pieces. No, no! I 
can't say any more. I  don't remember anything else.' 
     'Look at me!' said Gandalf. 
     Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a  
moment  in silence. Then  his face grew  gentler, and the shadow  of a smile 
appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin's head. 
     'All right!' he said. 'Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no 
lie in your eyes, as I feared. But  he did not speak long with you.  A fool, 
but an honest  fool,  you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might  have done 
worse  in such  a  pass. But mark this!  You  have  been saved, and all your 
friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it 
a second  time. If he had  questioned  you, then and there, almost certainly 
you would have told all that you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too 
eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you,  quickly, so that he 
could deal with you in the  Dark Tower, slowly.  Don't shudder! If  you will 
meddle  in  the affairs  of Wizards, you  must  be prepared  to think of such 
things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as 
evilly as they might.' 
     He  lifted  Pippin  gently  and  carried  him  back to  his bed.  Merry 
followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can,  Pippin!' 
said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of 

####-it!  Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear hobbit, don't put  a lump  
of  rock  under  my  elbow  again! Now, I will leave you  two together for a  
while.' 
     With  that Gandalf  returned to the others, who  were still standing by 
the  Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. 'Peril comes in the night when least 
expected,' he said. 'We have had a narrow escape!' 
     'How is the hobbit, Pippin?' asked Aragorn. 
     'I think all  will  be well  now,' answered  Gandalf. 'He was  not held 
long, and  hobbits have  an  amazing power of  recovery. The memory, or  the 
horror of it, will probably fade  quickly. Too  quickly, perhaps. Will  you, 
Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.' 
     'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,' said Aragorn. 'There is one who may 
claim it by right.  For this assuredly  is the palantnr of Orthanc  from the 
treasury  of  Elendil, set here by  the Kings  of Gondor. Now my hour  draws 
near. I will take it.' 
     Gandalf looked  at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others, he 
lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it. 
     'Receive it,  lord!' he said: 'in earnest of other things that shall be 
given back. But if I may counsel you in the use  of your own, do not use  it 
-- yet! Be wary!' 
     'When have I been hasty or unwary, who have  waited and prepared for so 
many long years?' said Aragorn. 
     'Never  yet.  Do not then  stumble at the end  of the  road,'  answered 
Gandalf. 'But  at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that 
stand  here! The hobbit, Peregrin,  above  all should not know  where it  is 
bestowed.  The evil fit may come on him again. For alas! he  has  handled it  
and  looked in it, as should never have  happened. He ought  never  to  have  
touched it in Isengard,  and  there I should have been quicker. But my  mind 
was bent  on Saruman, and I did not at once  guess the  nature of the Stone. 
Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!' 
     'Yes, there can  be no doubt,' said Aragorn. 'At last we know the link' 
between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explained.' 'Strange 
powers have our enemies, and strange  weaknesses!' said Thjoden. 'But it has 
long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar. ' 
     'That many times is seen,' said Gandalf. 'But at this time we have been 
strangely fortunate. Maybe, I  have been  saved by this  hobbit from a grave 
blunder. I  had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find 

####-its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not  
ready for such a  trial, if indeed I  shall ever be so:  But even if I found 
the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for  him to see me, yet  
-- until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.' 
     'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn. 
     'Not yet,' said Gandalf. 'There remains a short while of doubt which we 
must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that  the Stone was in  Orthanc  -- 
why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit  was captive there,  driven 
to look in the  glass for his  torment by  Saruman.  That dark mind will  be 
filled  now with  the voice  and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it 
may take some time before he  learns his error. We must snatch that time. We 
have been too leisurely. We must  move. The neighbourhood of  Isengard is no 
place now  to  linger in. I will  ride ahead at once with Peregrin  Took. It 
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.' 
     'I will keep  Jomer and ten Riders,'  said the  king. 'They shall  ride 
with me at early day.  The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they 
have a mind.' 
     'As you  will,'  said Gandalf. 'But  make all  the speed you may to the 
cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!' 
     At that moment  a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to 
be suddenly cut  off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding 
their  arms above  their hea ds, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind 
fear and a deadly  cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged 
shape  passed over the moon like a  black cloud. It wheeled and went  north, 
flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle-earth. The  stars  fainted 
before it. It was gone. 
     They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and 
downwards, stiff, his hands clenched. 
     'Nazgyl!' he cried.  'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The  
Nazgyl have crossed the River!  Ride, ride! Wait  not for the  dawn! Let not  
the swift wait for the slow! Ride!' 
     He  sprang  away, calling Shadowfax  as  he ran.  Aragorn followed him.  
Going  to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me 
this  time,' he said.  'Shadowfax shall show you his  paces.' Then he ran to 
the place  where he had slept. Shadowfax  stood there  already. Slinging the  
small bag which was all his luggage  across his  shoulders, the wizard leapt 
upon the  horse's back. Aragor n lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf's arms,  

####-,wrapped in cloak and blanket. 
     'Farewell! Follow fast!' cried Gandalf. 'Away, Shadowfax!' 
     The  great  horse  tossed his  head. His  flowing tail  flicked in  the 
moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the  earth, and was gone like the 
north wind from the mountains.  
     'A beautiful, restful  night!' said  Merry to Aragorn. 'Some folk  have 
wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf 
-- and there he goes! Instead of being turned into  a stone himself to stand 
here for ever as a warning.' 
     'If  you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not  he, how 
would it be now?' said Aragorn. 'You might have done worse. Who can say? 
But 
now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At  once. Go and get ready, and  
bring anything that Pippin left behind. Make haste!' 
     Over the  plains  Shadowfax  was  flying,  needing  no  urging  and  no 
guidance. Less than  an hour  had  passed, and they had reached the Fords of 
Isen and crossed  them. The Mound of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey 
behind them. 
     Pippin was recovering. He  was warm, but the wind in his  face was keen 
and refreshing. He was  with  Gandalf. The horror of  the stone  and  of the 
hideous shadow over the  moon was fading, things left behind in the mists of 
the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath. 
     'I did not know  you rode bare-back, Gandalf,' he said. 'You  haven't a  
saddle or a bridle!' 
     'I  do not ride elf-fashion,  except on Shadowfax,' said Gandalf.  'But 
Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax:  he is willing to 
carry you -or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It  is then his business 
to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.' 
     'How  fast is  he going?'  asked Pippin. 'Fast  by  the  wind, but very 
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!' 
     'He  is  running  now  as  fast  as  the swiftest horse could  gallop,' 
answered Gandalf; 'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little 
here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White 
Mountains are  drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the  Thrihyrne peaks 
like black spears. It will not  be long before we reach the  branching roads 
and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.' 
     Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to 

####-himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as the miles ran 
under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught  
the  words: a few lines came clear  to his  ears  through the rushing of the 
wind: 
     Tall ships and tall kings 
     Three times three, 
     What brought they from the foundered land  
     Over the flowing sea? 
     Seven stars and seven stones 
     And one white tree. 
     'What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin. 
     'I was  just  running over  some of the  Rhymes  of  Lore in  my mind ' 
answered  the wizard. 'Hobbits,  I suppose, have forgotten  them, even those  
that they ever knew.' 
     'No, not  all,'  said  Pippin.  'And  we have many  of our  own,  which 
wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard  this one. What is it 
about -- the seven stars and seven stones?' 
     'About the palantnri of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf. 
     'And what are they?' 
     'The name meant  that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone was one.' 
     'Then it was not made, not made'  -- Pippin hesitated -- 'by the Enemy?' 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by  Saruman. It is  beyond his art, and beyond  
Sauron's too. The palantnri came from beyond Westernesse  from Eldamar.  
The 
Noldor made  them. Flanor himself,  maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago 
that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is  nothing that Sauron 
cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for  Saruman! It was his downfall,  as  I now 
perceive.  Perilous to us all  are the devices  of an  art  deeper  than  we 
possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool!  to keep it secret, for  
his own  profit. No word did he ever  speak of it to any of the  Council. We 
had not yet given  thought  to the fate of  the palantnri of Gondor  in  its 
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even  in Gondor they were a  
secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of 
lore among the DÂ®nedain.' 
     'What  did  the Men of old use  them for?' asked Pippin, delighted  and 
astonished at getting answers to  so  many questions, and wondering how long 
it would last. 

####-     'To  see far  off, and to converse in thought with  one  another,' said 
Gandalf. 'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They 
set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at  Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring 
of Isengard. The  chief  and master of these was under  the Dome of Stars at 
Osgiliath before  its ruin. The three others were far  away in the North. In 
the house  of Elrond  it is told that they were at AnnÂ®minas, and  Amon Syl, 
and Elendil's Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards M ithlond in the 
Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie. 
     'Each palantnr replied to each, but all those in Gondor were  ever open 
to the view of Osgiliath.  Now  it appears that,  as the rock of Orthanc has 
withstood  the  storms of time, so  there  the palantnr  of  that tower  has 
remained.  But alone  it could do nothing but see small images of things far 
off  and days remote. Very  useful, no doubt, that  was  to Saruman;  yet it 
seems that he was not content. Further and further abroad he gazed, until  he 
cast his gaze upon Barad-dyr. Then he was caught! 
     'Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or  
drowned deep? But  one. at least Sauron  must have obtained and  mastered to 
his purposes. I guess that  it was the Ithil-stone,  for he took Minas Ithil 
long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become. 
     'Easy  it  is  now to guess how quickly the roving  eye of Saruman  was 
trapped and held; and how  ever  since he has been persuaded  from afar, and 
daunted when persuasion  would not serve. The biter bit, the  hawk under the 
eagle's foot, the spider  in a  steel web!  How long, I  wonder, has he been 
constrained to  come often to his glass for inspection and instruction,  and 
the Orthanc-stone so bent towards Barad-dyr  that, if  any  save  a will  of 
adamant now looks into it,  it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? 
And  how it draws  one to itself! Have I  not  felt it?  Even now  my  heart 
desires to test my will  upon it,  to see if I could not wrench it from  him 
and turn it where I  would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time 
to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Flanor at 
their work, while both  the  White Tree and the  Golden were  in flower!' He 
sighed and fell silent. 
     'I wish I had known all this before,' said Pippin. 'I had  no notion of 
what I was doing.' 
     'Oh yes,  you had,' said  Gandalf. 'You  knew you were behaving wrongly 
and  foolishly;  and you told yourself so,  though you did not listen. I did 
not tell you all this before, because  it is only by  musing on all that has 

####-happened that I have at last  understood, even as we ride together. But if I  
had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier  
to  resist.  On the  contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After  that 
advice about fire goes to the heart.' 
     'It does,' said  Pippin. 'If all the seven  stones were laid out before 
me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.' 
     'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.' 
     'But I should like to know--' Pippin began. 
     'Mercy!' cried Gandalf. 'If the giving of information is to be the cure 
of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my  days in answering 
you. What more do you want to know?' 
     'The  names  of all the stars, and of all living  things, and the whole 
history of Middle-earth and Over -heaven and of  the Sundering Seas ' laughed 
Pippin. 'Of  course!  What less? But I  am  not in  a hurry tonight.  At the 
moment  I was  just wondering about the  black  shadow. I  heard  you  shout 
"messenger of Mordor". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?' 
     'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgyl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have 
taken you away to the Dark Tower . ' 
     'But it was not  coming  for me, was  it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it 
didn't know that I had... ' 
     'Of course not,' said  Gandalf. 'It is two hundred  leagues or  more in 
straight  flight  from Barad-dyr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgyl  would take a  
few hours to fly between  them.  But Saruman certainly looked  in  the Stone  
since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been 
read than he  intended. A  messenger has  been sent  to  find out what he is 
doing. And  after what has happened tonight another will come, I think,  and 
swiftly. So Saruman will come to  the last pinch of the vice that he has put 
his  hand in. He has  no captive to  send. He has no Stone to see  with, and 
cannot answer the summons. Sauron will  only  believe that he  is withholding 
the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not  help Saruman to tell 
the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe 
in Orthanc. So  whether  he  will  or  no,  he  will appear a rebel. Yet  he 
rejected  us, so as  to  avoid  that very thing! What he will  do in such  a  
plight,  I  cannot guess.  He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to 
resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap  the Nazgyl, 
or  at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the  air. In  that case 
let Rohan look to its horses!  

####-     'But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may  be 
that the counsels of the Enemy will  be confused,  or hindered by  his wrath 
with Saruman. It  may be that he will learn that  I was there and stood upon 
the stairs of Orthanc-with  hobbits at my tail. Or that  an heir  of Elendil 
lives and stood beside  me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the  armour of 
Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what 
I fear. And so we fly  -- not  from  danger but  into  greater danger.  Every 
stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.' 
     Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had 
struck him. Grey land passed under them. 
     'See now!' said Gandalf. 'The Westfold dales  are  opening  before  us.  
Here we come back to the eastward  road. The dark shadow yonder is the 
mouth 
of the  Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond a nd the  Glittering Caves.  Do 
not ask  me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time 
you  may  get an answer  longer than you wish.  You  will not see the  caves 
yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.' 
     'I thought you were going to stop  at Helm's Deep!' said Pippin. 'Where 
are you going then?' 
     'To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.' 
     'Oh! And how far is that?' 
     'Leagues  upon  leagues,'  answered  Gandalf.  'Thrice as  far  as  the 
dwellings of King Thjoden, and they are more than a hundred  miles east from 
here, as  the  messengers of  Mordor fly. Shadowfax must run  a longer road.  
Which will prove the swifter? 
     'We  shall ride  now till  daybreak, and that is  some hours away.  Then 
even Shadowfax must  rest, in some hollow of the  hills: at Edoras, I  hope. 
Sleep, if  you can! You  may see the first  glimmer of dawn upon the  golden  
roof of  the house of Eorl. And in two days thence you shall see the  purple 
shadow  of Mount Mindolluin and the  walls of the tower of Denethor white in 
the morning. 
     'Away  now,  Shadowfax!  Run,  greatheart,  run as  you have never  run 
before! Now we are come to the lands  where you were foaled  and every stone 
you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!' 
     Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had summoned 
him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his feet; night rushed 
over him. 

####-     As he  fell  slowly into  sleep, Pippin had a  strange feeling:  he and 
Gandalf  were  still as stone, seated  upon the  statue of a running  horse, 
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind. 
 
 

####- * BOOK IV *  

 

 
 
 

Chapter 1. The Taming of Smjagol 

 
 
     'Well, master,  we're in  a fix and  no mistake,'  sa id Sam  Gamgee. He 
stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and peered out  with 
puckered eyes into the gloom. 
     It was the third evening since they had fled from  the Company,  as far 
as they could  tell:  they had  almost lost count of  the  hours during which 
they had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes and stones of the 
Emyn 
Muil,  sometimes retracing  their  steps  because  they could  find  no  way 
forward,  sometimes discovering  that they  had wandered in a circle back to 
where they  had been hours before. Yet on the whole they had worked steadily 
eastward, keeping as near as they could find a way to the outer edge of this 
strange  twisted  knot of hills. But  always  they  found its  outward faces 
sheer,  high  and  impassable, frowning  over  the plain  below;  beyond its 
tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not  even 
a bird was to be seen. 
     The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak, its 
feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken highlands crowned with 
drifting  cloud. A chill wind` blew from the East. Night was gathering  over  
the shapeless  lands before them; the sickly  green of them was fading  to a  
sullen brown. Far away to the right the Anduin, that had gleamed fitfully in 
sun-breaks during the day, was now  hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not 
look beyond the  River,  back to Gondor, to  their friends, to the lands  of 
Men. South and east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night,  
a dark line hung, like distant mountains  of motionless smoke. Every now and 
again a  tiny red gleam far away  flickered upwards on the rim of earth  and 
sky. 
     `What a fix! ' said Sam.  `That's the one place  in all the lands we've 
ever heard of that we  don't want to see any closer; and that's the one place 
we're trying  to  get  to! And  that's just where we can't get, nohow. We've 
come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can't get down;  and if  we did 

####-get down, we'd find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can 
you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind. 
     'Yes, I can smell  it,'  said Frodo, but he did not move,  and his eyes 
remained fixed, staring out towards the  dark line and the flickering flame. 
`Mordor! ' he muttered under his breath. 'If I  must go there I wish I could 
come there quickly and make an  end! ' He shuddered. The wind was chilly and 
yet heavy with an odour of cold decay.  `Well,' he said, at last withdrawing 
his eyes, `we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more 
sheltered spot,  and camp once more; and perhaps another  day will show us a 
path.' 
     'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam.  `Or  maybe no day.  
We've come the wrong way.' 
     'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my  doom, I think, to go  to  that Shadow 
yonder, so that a way will  be found.  But will good or evil show it to  me?  
What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I 
am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices 
have proved ill. I should have  left the Company long  before, and come down 
from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard 
of Battle Plain  to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible  for you  
and me alone to find a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank. 
Every  day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don't know 
what is to be done. What food have we got left?' 
     'Only those, what d'you call 'em, lembas, Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But 
they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I 
first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I 
do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug -- aye, half  a mug  -- of beer would 
go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last  camp, 
and what use  has  it been? Naught  to  make a fire with, for  a start;  and 
naught to cook, not even grass!' 
     They turned  away and went down into a  stony hollow. The westering sun 
was caught into clouds,  and night came swiftly. They slept as  well as they 
could  for the  cold, turn and  turn about,  in a  nook among  great  jagged 
pinnacles of weathered rock; at  least they were sheltered from the easterly 
wind. 
     `Did you see them  again, Mr . Frodo?' asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and 
chilled, munching wafers of  lembas, in the cold grey of early morning. 
     'No,' said Frodo. `I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights 

####-now.' 
     `Nor me,' said  Sam. `Grrr!  Those eyes did give me a  turn! But perhaps 
we've shaken  him off at  last, the miserable slinker. Gollum! I'll give him 
gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.' 
     'I  hope  you'll never need to,'  said  Frodo.  `I don't  know  how  he 
followed us; but it may be that  he's lost us again, as you say. In this dry 
bleak  land we  can't leave  many  footprints, nor much scent, even  for his 
snuffling nose.' 
     'I hope that's the way of it,' said Sam. 'I wish we could be rid of him 
for good!' 
     'So do I,' said Frodo; 'but he's not my chief trouble. I wish we  could 
get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on  the  east side, 
stuck up here with  nothing but  the  dead  flats between me and that Shadow 
yonder. There's an Eye in it. Come on! We've got to get down today somehow.' 
     But  that day wore on, and  when  afternoon faded towards evening  they 
were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of escape. 
     Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied  that they 
heard faint sounds behind  them, a stone falling,  or the  imagined step  of 
flapping feet on the rock. But if they halted  and  stood  still  listening, 
they heard  no more,  nothing but  the  wind sighing over  the  edges of the 
stones -- yet even that reminded them of breath softly hissing through sharp 
teeth. 
     All that  day  the  outer  ridge of the  Emyn  Muil  had  been  bending 
gradually northward,  as  they  struggled  on.  Along  its  brink there  now 
stretched  a wide tumbled flat of scored and  weathered rock,  cut  every now  
and again by trench-like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep notches in  
the cliff-face. To find a path in  these clefts, which  were becoming deeper 
and more  frequent, Frodo  and Sam were driven to their left, well away from 
the edge, and they did not notice that for several miles they had been going 
slowly but steadily downhill: the cliff-top was sinking towards the level of 
the lowlands. 
     At last  they were brought to a  halt.  The ridge took  a  sharper bend 
nor thward and was gashed by  a deeper  ravine. On the further side it reared 
up again,  many fathoms at a single  leap: a great grey cliff  loomed before 
them, cut sheer down  as if by  a  knife stroke.  They could  go  no further 
forwards, and must turn now either west or east. But west  would  lead  them 
only  into more labour and delay, back towards the  heart of the hills; east 

####-would take them to the outer precipice. 
     `There's nothing for it but  to scramble down  this gully,  Sam,'  said 
Frodo. `Let's see what it leads to!' 
     'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam. 
     The  cleft  was  longer and deeper  than it seemed. Some way down  they 
found a  few gnarled and stunted  trees,  the first they  had seen for days: 
twisted birch for  the  most part, with here and there a fir -tree. Many were 
dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds. Once in milder days 
there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty 
yards,  the  trees  came to  an end, though  old broken stumps  straggled on 
almost to the cliff's brink. The bottom of  the  gully, which  lay along the 
edge of a rock -fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply  down. 
When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out. 
     `Look!' he said. `We must have come down a  long way, or else the cliff 
has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.' 
     Sam knelt beside  him  and peered  reluctantly over the  edge.  Then he 
glanced up at the great  cliff rising up, away on  their left. `Easier! ' he 
grunted. `Well, I  suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as 
can't fly can jump!' 
     `It would be a big jump still,' said Frodo. `About, well'  --  he  stood 
for a moment measuring it with his eyes  -- `about eighteen  fathoms I should  
guess. Not more.' 
     'And that's enough! ' said Sam. `Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a 
height! But looking's better than climbing.' 
     `All the same,' said Frodo, `I think  we could climb here; and  I think  
we shall have to try. See -- the rock is quite different from  what it was a  
few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.' 
     The outer fall  was  indeed no  longer  sheer,  but  sloped outwards  a  
little. It looked  like a great rampart or  sea -wall whose  foundations  had 
shifted, so that  its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving great 
fissures  and  long  slanting edges that were in places  almost as  wide  as 
stairs. 
     `And if we're going to try and  get down, we had better  try  at  once. 
It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.' 
     The smoky  blur of the mountains  in the  East  was  lost  in a  deeper  
blackness that was already reaching out  westwards with long arms. There was 
a distant  mutter of  thunder borne on the rising breeze. Frodo sniffed  the 

####-air and looked up  doubtfully at the  sky. He strapped his belt  outside his 
cloak  and  tightened it, and settled  his  light pack on  his back; then he 
stepped towards the edge. `I'm going to try it,' he said. 
     `Very good! ' said Sam gloomily. `But I'm going first.' 
     'You? ' said Frodo. `What's made you change your mind about climbing?' 
     'I haven't changed my mind.  But it's only sense: put the one lowest as 
is most  likely to slip. I don't want to come down atop of you a nd knock you  
off no sense in killing two with one fall.' 
     Before Frodo  could  stop  him,  he  sat down,  swung his legs over the 
brink,  and twisted round, scrabbling with  his toes for a  foothold.  It is 
doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more unwise. 
     'No,  no! Sam, you  old ass! ' said Frodo.  `You'll kill  yourself  for  
certain going  over like that without  even a look to see what  to make for. 
Come back! '  He took Sam under  the armpits and hauled him up  again. 'Now,  
wait a bit and be patient! ' he said. Then he lay on the ground, leaning out 
and looking  down: but the light  seemed to be fading quickly, although  the  
sun had not yet set. 'I think we  could manage this,' he  said presently. `I  
could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your  head and followed me  
carefully.' 
     `I don't know how you can be so sure,' said Sam. `Why! You can't see to 
the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where there's nowhere 
to put your feet or your hands?' 
     'Climb back, I suppose,' said Frodo. 
     'Easy said,' objected Sam. 'Better wait till morning and more light.' 
     `No! Not if I can help it,' said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence. 
`I grudge every hour, every minute. I'm  going down to try it out.  Don't you  
follow till I come back or call!' 
     Gripping  the stony lip of  the  fall with  his fingers he  let himself 
gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes found 
a ledge.  'On_ e step down!  ' he  said. 'And this ledge broadens out to the 
right. I could stand there without a hold. I'll--' his words were cut short. 
     The  hurrying  darkness, now gathering  great speed, rushed up from the 
East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right  
overhead. Searing  lightning smote down into the hills. Then came a blast of 
savage wind, and with  it, mingling with its  roar, there came a high shrill 
shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as they 
fled  from Hobbiton, and even there  in the woods of the Shire it had frozen 

####-their blood.  Out  here  in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced 
them  with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam 
fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands 
over his head and ears. He swayed,  slipped,  and slithered downwards with a 
wailing cry. 
     Sam  heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master! 
' he called.  'Master!'.  
     He heard no answer.  He  found he was  shaking all over, but he gathered  
his breath, and once again he shouted: 'Master!' The wind seemed to blow his 
voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up  the gully and away 
over the hills, a faint answering cry came to his ears:  
     'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.' 
     Frodo  was  calling with a  weak voice. ,He  was not actually very  far 
away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on 
a wider ledge not  many yards lower down. Fortunately  the  rock -face at this 
point leaned well back and  the  wind had pressed him against the  cliff, so 
that he had not toppled  over. He steadied himself a little, laying his face 
against the cold stone, feeling  his heart pounding. But either the darkness 
had  grown  complete, or else  his eyes had lost  their sight. All was black  
about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.  
     `Come  back!  Come  back! '  he heard Sam's voice out  of the blackness 
above. 
     `I can't,' he said. `I  can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't  move 
yet.' 
     `What  can  I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?  ' shouted Sam, leaning out 
dangerously far.  Why could not his master see?  It was dim, certainly,  but 
not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him, a grey forlorn figure 
splayed against  the cliff. But  he was far out of the  reach of any helping 
hand. 
     There  was another crack  of  thunder;  and then  the  rain came.  In a  
blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold. 
     'I'm  coming  down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in 
that way he could not have said. 
     `No,  no!  wait!  ' Frodo  called back, more strongly now. `I  shall be 
better  soon. I feel  better already. Wait! You can't do anything  without a  
rope.' 
     `Rope!'  cried  Sam, talking wildly to himself  in  his  excitement and 

####-relief. `Well, if I don't deserve  to be hung on the end of one as a warning 
to numbskulls!  You're nowt  but a ninnyhammer, Sam Gamgee: that's  what 
the 
Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!' 
     `Stop  chattering!' cried  Frodo,  now  recovered  enough to feel  both 
amused and annoyed. 'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself 
you've got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it! 
     `Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and  all.  Carried it hundreds of miles and 
I'd clean forgotten it!' 
     `Then get busy and let an end down!' 
     Quickly  Sam  unslung  his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the 
bottom was a coil  of the silken-grey rope made by the folk  of  Lurien.  He 
cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo's eyes, or  
else his sight was returning. He could see the grey line as it came dangling 
down, and he thought it had a faint silver sheen. Now that he had some point  
in the darkness to  fix his eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning  his weight 
forward, he made the  end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line 
with both hands.  
     Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from 
the edge.  Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up  and threw himself on 
the ground. 
     Thunder growled  and  rumbled in the distance,  and the rain was  still 
falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully; but  they did 
not find  much shelter there.  Rills of water began  to run down;  soon they 
grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the  stones, and spouted out over  
the cliff like the gutters of a vast roof. 
     `I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,' said 
Frodo. 'What a piece of luck you had that rope!' 
     `Better  luck  if  I'd thought  of  it sooner,'  said Sam.  'Maybe  you  
remember them putting the  ropes in the boats,  as we started  off:  in  the 
elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and  I stowed a coil in my pack. Years 
ago, it seems.  "It may be a help in many needs," he said: Haldir, or one of 
those folk. And he spoke right.' 
     `A  pity I didn't think of bringing another length,' said Frodo; `but I 
left  the  Company in such a hurry and confusion. If  only  we had enough we 
could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?' 
     Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: 'Five, ten, twenty, 

####-thirty ells, more or less,' he said. 
     'Who'd have  thought it!' Frodo exclaimed. 
     `Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. `Elves are wonderful folk. It looks  a  bit 
thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the  hand. Packs close too, and as 
light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!' 
     `Thirty ells! '  said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough. 
If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.' 
     `The rain's nearly  given over already,'  said Sam;  'but  don't you go 
doing anything risky in the  dim again, Mr.  Frodo! And I  haven't  got over 
that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it  sounded-but 
one up in the air, if they can fly.  I'm  thinking we'd  best lay up in this 
crack till night's over.' 
     'And I'm  thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck  
up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,' 
said Frodo. 
     With  that he stood up and went  down to the bottom of the gully again. 
He looked out.  Clear sky  was  growing in the East once more. The skirts of 
the  storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the  main  battle had passed to 
spread its great wings over the Emyn  Muil; upon which  the dark thought  of 
Sauron brooded for a  while.  Thence it turned, smiting  the Vale of  Anduin 
with hail  and lightning,  and  casting its shadow upon  Minas  Tirith  with 
threat  of  war.  Then,  lowering in the mountains,  and gathering its great 
spires,  it rolled on slowly over Gondor  and the skirts of Rohan, until far 
away the Riders on  the plain saw its black towers mov ing behind the sun, as 
they  rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the  reeking marshes 
the  deep  blue sky of  evening  opened once  more, and  a few  pallid stars 
appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon. 
     `It's good  to be able to see again,' said Frodo,  breathing  deep. `Do 
you know, I thought for a  bit that I had lost my sight? From  the lightning 
or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey 
rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.' 
     `It does look  sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. `Never noticed it 
before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed 
it. But if you're so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo,  how  are you  going to use 
it?  Thirty ells, or  say, about eighteen fathom: that's  no  more than your 
guess at the height of the cliff.' 
     Frodo thought for a while. `Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ' he said. 

####-`Then I think  you  shall have your wish this time and go first. I'll  lower  
you, and you need do no more than use  your feet and hands  to fend yourself 
off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on  some of the ledges and give 
me a  rest, it will help. When you're down, I'll follow. I feel quite myself 
again now.' 
     'Very well,' said Sam heavily. `If it must be, let's get it  over! ' He 
took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest  to the brink; then 
the  other  end  he tied about  his own waist.  Reluctantly  he  turned  and 
prepared to go over the edge a second time. 
     It did not, however, turn  out half as bad as he had expected. The rope 
seemed  to give him confidence, though he  shut his eyes more than once when 
he looked down between his feet. There was one awkward spot, where there 
was 
no ledge and the wa ll was sheer and even undercut for  a short  space; there 
he slipped and  swung  out on the silver  line. But Frodo lowered him slowly 
and steadily, and  it was over at  last. His  chief  fear had been  that the 
rope-length would give out while he was still high up, but there was still a  
good bight in Frodo's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: `I'm 
down! ' His voice came up clearly from below,  but Frodo could not see  him; 
his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight. 
     Frodo took rather  more time to follow him. He had the  rope  about his 
waist and  it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that it  would pull 
him up before  he  reached the ground; still he did not want to risk a fall, 
and he had not quite  Sam's faith in  this   slender grey line.  He found two 
places, all  the  same,  where he had to trust wholly to it: smooth surfaces 
where there was no hold even  for  his strong hobbit  fingers and the ledges 
were far apart. But at last he too was down. 
     `Well!' he cried.  `We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And 
now what next, I  wonder? Maybe we shall soon  be sighing for good hard rock  
under foot again.' 
     But   Sam  did   not  answer:  he  was   staring  back  up  the  cliff.  
`Ninnyhammers!  ' he said. `Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to a  
stump,  and  we're  at the  bottom.  Just  as  nice a little stair for  that 
slinking Gollum as we could leave. Better put up a signpost to say which way 
we've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.' 
     `If you can think of any way  we could have both used the rope and  yet 
brought  it down with  us, then you  can  pass on to me ninnyhammer, or  any 

####-other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. `Climb up and untie it and let  
yourself down, if you want to! ' 
     Sam scratched his head. `No,  I can't think how, begging  your pardon,' 
he  said. `But I don't like leaving it, and that's  a fact.' He  stroked the 
rope's  end  and  shook  it  gently.  `It goes  hard parting with anything I 
brought  out  of  the  Elf-country. Made  by Galadriel herself, too,  maybe. 
Galadriel,' he murmured  nodding his head  mournfully. He looked up and gave 
one last pull to the rope as if in farewell. 
     To  the  complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam  fell 
over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down  on top  of him. Frodo 
laughed. `Who  tied the rope? ' he said. `A good thing it held as long as it 
did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!' 
     Sam did not laugh. `I may not be much good at climbing, Mr.  Frodo,' he 
said in injured tones, `but I do know something  about rope and about knots.  
It's in the family, as you might  say. Why, my grand-dad, and my  uncle Andy 
after him, him that  was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over 
by Tighfield many a year.  And I put as fast a hitch  over the  stump as any 
one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.' 
     `Then the rope must have broken  -- frayed on the rock -edge, I expect,' 
said Frodo. 
     `I bet it didn't! ' said Sam in an  even more injured voice. He stooped 
and examined the ends. `Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!' 
     'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo. 
     Sam shook his  head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through 
his  fingers  thoughtfully. `Have it  your own way, Mr.  Frodo,' he  said at 
last, `but I think the  rope came off itself  -- when I called.' He coiled it 
up and stowed it lovingly in his pack. 
     'It certainly came,' said Frodo, `and that's the  chief thing.  But now 
we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful 
the stars are, and the Moon!' 
     'They do cheer  the heart, don't they?  ' said Sam looking up.  'Elvish 
they  are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't  seen him for a night 
or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.' 
     'Yes,' said Frodo; `but he  won't be full for some  days. I don't think  
we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.' 
     Under the first shadows of night they started  out on the next stage of 
their journey. After  a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had 

####-come. The mouth  of the gully was a black notch in the  dim cliff. `I'm glad 
we've got  the rope,' he said. 'We've set a little puzzle for  that footpad, 
anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!' 
     They  picked  their  steps away from the  skirts of the cliff,  among a  
wilderness of boulders  and  rough stones, wet  and slippery with the  heavy  
rain.  The ground still fell  away  sharply. They had not gone very far when 
they came upon a great fissure that yawned suddenly black before their feet. 
It was not wide,  but it was too wide to  jump across in the dim light. They 
thought they  could hear water  gurgling in  its  depths. It curved  away  on 
their  left  northward, back  towards the hills. and so barred their road in 
that direction, at any rate while darkness lasted. 
     'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I 
think,'  said  Sam.  `We might  find some  nook  there, or  even  a cave  or  
something.' 
     'I  suppose so,'  said  Frodo.  'I'm tired.  and  I don't  think I  can 
scramble among stones much  longer tonight --  though  I grudge the delay. I 
wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I'd go on till my legs gave 
way.' 
     They did not find the going  any easier at the  broken feet of the Emyn 
Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook  or hollow  to shelter in: only  bare  stony 
slopes frowned  over  by the  cliff, which  now rose again, higher  and more 
sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they  just cast themselves on 
the ground  under the lee  of a boulder lying not far  from the foot of  the 
precipice. There  for some time  they sat huddled mournfully together in the 
cold stony night, while sleep crept  upon them in spite of all they could do 
to hold it off.  The moon now rode high and  clear. Its thin white light lit 
up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff, 
turning  all the wide  looming darkness into a   chill  pale grey scored with 
black shadows. 
     'Well! '  said  Frodo, standing up and drawing  his cloak more  closely 
round him.  `You  sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket.  I'll walk up and 
down on sentry for a while.' Suddenly he stiffened,  and stooping he gripped  
Sam by the  arm. `What's  that?  '  he whispered. `Look  over  there on  the 
cliff!' 
     Sam looked and breathed in  sharply through his teeth. `Ssss!' he said. 
'That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to think tha t I 
thought that  we'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at  him!  Like a  

####-nasty crawling spider on a wall.' 
     Down the face of a precipice, sheer  and almost smooth it seemed in the 
pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin  limbs  splayed 
out. Maybe its soft clinging  hands and toes were finding crevices and holds 
that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just  
creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind.  
And it was coming down  head  first, as  if it was smelling its way. Now and 
again it lifted its head slowly, turning  it  right back on  its long skinny 
neck, and the hobbits  caught  a glimpse of two small pale gleaming  lights,  
its eyes that blinked at the moon  for a moment and then were quickly lidded  
again. 
     `Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam. 
     `I don't know,' said Frodo  quietly, `but I think not. It  is hard even 
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot  see you in the shadow 
even at a  few paces. And I've heard that he doesn't like Sun or Moon.' 
     `Then why is he coming down just here? ' asked Sam. 
     'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. `He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear 
as keen as  Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something  now: our voices 
probably. We did a lot of shouting  away back there; and we were talking far 
too loudly until a minute ago.' 
     `Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. `He's come once too often for me and 
I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't suppose  we  could give 
him the slip  now anyway.' Drawing his grey  hood well  over  his  face, Sam 
crept stealthily towards the cliff.  
     `Careful!' whispered Frodo coming behind.  `Don't  alarm him! He's much 
more dangerous than he looks.' 
     The black crawling shape was now three-quarters  of  the way down,  and 
perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's  foot. Crouching stone-still in 
the shadow of a large  boulder the hobbits watched him.  He seemed  to  have 
come  to a  difficult passage or  to be troubled about something. They could  
hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh  hiss of breath that 
sounded like  a curse. He lifted his head, and they  thought  they heard him 
spit. Then  he  moved on again. Now they could hear  his voice creaking  and 
whistling. 
     `Ach,  sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste  less speed.  We musstn't 
rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious  -- gollum!'  He lifted his 
head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. `We hate it,' he 

####-hissed.  `Nassty,  nassty shivery light it is  -- sss  --  it  spies on  us,  
precious -- it hurts our eyes.' 
     He was getting  lower now and the  hisses became  sharper  and clearer. 
'Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours, it is, and 
we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the filthy  little thieves. Where are 
they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.' 
     `It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? ' whispered Sam. 
`And what's his Precious? Does he mean the' 
     `Hsh!  ' breathed  Frodo. 'He's getting near now, near enough to hear a  
whisper.' 
     Indeed Gollum  had suddenly paused again,  and his  large  head on  its 
scrawny neck was  lolling from side to side as if he was listening. His pale 
eyes were  half  unlidded. Sam restrained  himself, though his fingers  were 
twitching. His  eyes,  filled with anger  and  disgust,  were  fixed  on the 
wretched  creature as  he  now  began  to  move again,  still whispering and 
hissing to himself.  
     At last he wa s no more than a  dozen  feet from the ground, right above 
their  heads. From that  point  there  was a sheer  drop, for  the cliff was 
slightly undercut,  and  even Gollum could not find a hold of any  kind.  He 
seemed to be trying to twist round, so  as to go legs  first, when  suddenly 
with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did so, he curled his legs and 
arms up round him, like a spider whose descending thread is snapped. 
     Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the  space between him 
and the cliff foot in  a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get up, he was 
on top of him.  But he  found Gollum more than he bargained for, even  taken 
like that,  suddenly, off  his guard after  a  fall. Before Sam  could get a  
hold, long legs  and arms  were  wound round  him  pinning  his  arms, and a  
clinging grip, soft  but  horribly  strong, was  squeezing  him  like slowly  
tightening  cords;  clammy fingers were feeling for  his throat.  Then sharp 
teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head 
sideways into  the creature's face. Gollum hissed and spat, but  he did  not 
let go. 
     Things  would have gone  ill with  Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo 
sprang  up, and drew  Sting from its sheath. With his left hand he drew back  
Gollum's head by his thin lank hair, stretching  his long neck, and  forcing 
his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky. 
     `Let go! Gollum,' he said. `This is Sting. You have seen it before once 

####-upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll cut your throat.' 
     Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering 
his  shoulder.  His eyes  smouldered  with  anger, but  he could  not avenge 
himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering. 
     `Don't hurt  us! Don't let them hurt us,  precious! They won't hurt  us 
will they, nice little hobbitses?  We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on 
us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely, gollum. 
We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be  nice to  us, won't we, yes, 
yess.' 
     `Well, what's to be done with it? '  said  Sam.  `Tie  it up, so  as it 
can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.' 
     `But  that would kill  us, kill  us,'  whimpered  Gollum. `Cruel little 
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands  and leave us,  gollum, gollum. ' 
Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat. 
     `No,'  said Frodo. `If we kill him, we  must kill him outright. But  we 
can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.' 
     `Oh hasn't  he! ' said Sam rubbing his  shoulder.  `Anyway he meant to, 
and he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that's his plan.' 
     'I daresay,' said Frodo. `But what he means  to  do is another matter.' 
He paused for  a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering. 
Sam stood glowering over him. 
     It seemed  to Frodo  then  that he  heard,  quite  plainly but far off,  
voices out of the past: 
     What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance! 
     Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and  Mercy: not to strike 
without need. 
     I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death. 
     Deserves  death! I daresay  he does. Many that live  deserve death. And 
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager 
to  deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even 
the wise cannot see all ends. 
     `Very well,' he answered aloud, lowering  his  sword. 'But  still  I am 
afraid. And yet, as you see,  I will not touch  the creature. For now that I 
see him, I do pity him.' 
     Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was 
not there. Gollum lifted his head. 
     'Yess,  wretched we are,  precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits 

####-won't kill us, nice hobbits.' 
     'No,  we won't,'  said Frodo. `But we won't  let you go, either. You're 
full  of  wickedness and  mischief, Gollum. You will  have to come with  us,  
that's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if  you  can. 
One good turn deserves another.' 
     'Yess, yes indeed,' said Gollum sitting up. 'Nice hobbits! We will come 
with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And where are they 
going in these cold hard  lands, we  wonders, yes we wonders? ' He looked up 
at them, and a faint  light of cunning  and eagerness flickered for a second 
in his pale blinking eyes. 
     Sam scowled at him,  and sucked his  teeth; but he seemed to sense that 
there was  something  odd  about his master's  mood and that the  matter was 
beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo's reply. 
     Frodo  looked straight into Gollum's eyes  which  flinched  and twisted 
away. `You know that, or  you guess  well enough, Smjagol,' he said. quietly 
and sternly. `We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there, 
I believe.' 
     `Ach! sss! ' said Gollum, covering his  ears with his hands, as if such 
frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. `We guessed, yes we 
guessed,' he  whispered;  `and we didn't  want  them  to  go,  did  we?  No, 
precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and dust, and thirst there is;  
and pits, pits, pits, and Orcs, thousands of Orcses. Nice hobbits mustn't go 
to -- sss  -- those places.' 
     `So you have been there?  ' Frodo insisted. `And you're being drawn back  
there, aren't you?' 
     `Yess. Yess. No! ' shrieked Gollum. `Once, by  accident it  was, wasn't  
it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won't go back, no, no!' Then suddenly  
his voice and language changed,  and he sobbed in his throat,  and spoke but 
not to them. `Leave me alone, gollum! You hurt me.  O my poor hands, gollum! 
I,  we, I don't want  to come back. I can't find it. I am tired. I, we can't  
find it, gollum, gollum,  no, nowhere. They 're always awake.  Dwarves,  Men, 
and Elves, terrible Elves  with  bright eyes. I can't find it. Ach! ' He got 
up and clenched his long hand into a bony fleshless knot, shaking it towards 
the East. 'We  won't! ' he  cried. 'Not for  you.' Then he collapsed   again. 
'Gollum, gollum,' he whimpered with his face  to the  ground. 'Don't look at 
us! Go away! Go to sleep!' 
     `He will not go  away or go to sleep at  your  command, Smjagol,'  said 

####-Frodo. `But if you  really wish to be free of  him again. then you  must help 
me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go 
all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.' 
     Gollum sat up  again  and looked at him under  his eyelids. 'He's  over  
there,' he cackled. `Always there. Orcs  wi ll take you all the  way. Easy to 
find Orcs east of  the River. Don't ask Smjagol. Poor, poor Smjagol, he went  
away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.' 
     `Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo. 
     'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum. 
     'Get up! ' said Frodo. 
     Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff. 
     `Now! '  said Frodo. 'Can  you find  a path easier by day or by  night?  
We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll star t tonight.' 
     `The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. `Not  under the 
White  Face, not  yet. It will go behind  the  hills soon, yess. Rest  a bit 
first, nice hobbits!' 
     `Then sit down,' said Frodo, `and don't move!' 
     The  hobbits  seated themselves  beside  him, one on  either side. with 
their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need for any 
arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly 
the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before 
them. The stars grew thick  and bright in  the sky  above.  No one  stirred. 
Gollum  sat  with his legs drawn up, knees  under chin, flat hands  and feet 
splayed on the ground,  his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking 
or listening. 
     Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and  they  understood.  They 
relaxed,  leaning  their heads back, and  shutting their eyes or seeming to. 
Soon  the sound of  their  soft  breathing  could be  heard. Gollum's  hands 
twitched  a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved  to  the left  and the 
right, and  first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made 
no sign. 
     Suddenly,  with startling agility and  speed, straight  off  the ground 
with a jump like a  grasshopper or a frog. Gollum  bounded  forward into the  
darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected.  Sam was on 
him 
before he had gone two paces after  his spring. Frodo coming behind  grabbed 
his leg and threw him. 

####-     'Your rope might prove useful again, Sam.' he said. 
     Sam  got  out the  rope. 'And  where were you  off  to in the cold hard 
lands, Mr. Gollum?' he growled. 'We wonders.  aye,  we wonders. To find 
some 
of  your orc-friends,  I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It's round 
your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.' 
     Gollum lay quiet and tried  no further tricks.  He did not  answer Sam, 
but gave him a swift venomous look. 
     `All we need is something to keep a hold on him,' said Frodo. 'We  want 
him  to walk, so it's  no good  tying his legs-or his arms. he seems to  use 
them nearly as much. Tie one end to his  ankle, and keep a grip on the other  
end.' 
     He  stood over Gollum, while Sam  tied the  knot. The  result surprised 
them both. Gollum  began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very  horrible to 
hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his ankle and bite the rope.  
He kept on screaming. 
     At last Frodo was  convinced that  he really was  in pain; but it could 
not be from the knot. He examined it  and found that  it was not too  tight, 
indeed  hardly  tight  enough. Sam was gentler than his words.  'What's  the 
matter with you? ' he said. `If you will try to run away. you must  be tied;  
but we don't wish to hurt you.' 
     'It hurts us, it hurts us,' hissed Gollum. `It freezes, it bites! Elves 
twisted it,  curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we tries to escape, 
of course  it is, precious.  We guessed they were cruel hobbits. They visits 
Elves, fierce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts us.' 
     `No, I will not take it off you,' said Frodo, `not unless' -- he paused 
a  moment in thought -- `not unless there is any promise you can make that I  
can trust.' 
     'We  will swear to  do what he wants,  yes, yess,  said  Gollum,  still 
twisting and grabbling at his ankle. `It hurts us.' 
     `Swear? ' said Frodo. 
     'Smjagol,' said  Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and 
staring at Frodo with a strange light. 'Smjagol will swear on the Precious.' 
     Frodo drew himself up, and again  Sam was startled by his words and his 
stern voice. 'On the Precious? How dare you? ' he said. 'Think! 
     One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them. 
     Would you  commit your promise to that, Smjagol? It  will hold you. But 

####-it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!' 
     Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious. on the Precious! ' he repeated. 
     `And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo. 
     `To be very very good,' said Gollum.  Then crawling to Frodo's  feet he 
grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the 
words shook his very  bones with fear. 'Smjagol will swear never,  never, to 
let Him  have  it.  Never! Smjagol will save  it. But  he  must swear on the 
Precious.' 
     'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking  down at him with stern pity. 'All 
you wish is  to see it and touch it, if  you can,  though you know  it would 
drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it,  if you  will. For you know  where it 
is. Yes,  you know, Smjagol. It is before you.' 
     For  a moment it appeared to Sam that  his master had  grown and Gollum 
had shrunk: a  tall stern shadow, a mighty lord  who hid  his  brightness in 
grey cloud, and at his feet  a little whining  dog. Yet the two were in some 
way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's  minds. Gollum raised 
himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees. 
     'Down! down! ' said Frodo. `Now speak your promise!' 
     `We promises, yes I promise!' said Gollum. 'I  will serve the  master of 
the Precious. Good master, good Smjagol, gollum, gollum!' Suddenly he  began 
to weep and bite at his ankle again. 
     'Take the rope off, Sam!' said Frodo. 
     Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about, 
like a whipped cur  whose master  has patted it. From  that moment a change, 
which lasted for some time,  came over him. He spoke  with less  hissing and 
whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He 
would  cringe and  flinch,  if  they stepped  near  him or  made any  sudden 
movement,  and  he  avoided  the  touch of  their elven-cloaks; but  he  was 
friendly,  and  indeed pitifully anxious  to  please.  He would cackle  with 
laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even  if Frodo  spoke kindly to 
him, and weep if Frodo rebuked  him. Sam said little to  him of any sort. He 
suspected him more  deeply than ever,  and if possible liked the new Gollum, 
the Smjagol, less than the old. 
     'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he  said. 'now for 
it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start.' 
     'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one 
way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found it, I  did. Orcs 

####-don't use it,  Orcs  don't know  it.  Orcs don't cross the  Marshes, they go 
round for miles and  miles. Very  lucky  you  came  this way. Very lucky you 
found Smjagol, yes. Follow Smjagol!' 
     He took  a few  steps away  and  looked  back  inquiringly,  like a dog 
inviting  them for  a  walk. 'Wait a bit, Gollum!'  cried Sam. `Not too  far 
ahead now! I'm going to be at your tail, and I've got the rope handy.' 
     'No, no! ' said Gollum. 'Smjagol promised.' 
     In the  deep of night under hard  clear stars they set  off. Gollum led 
them back northward for a while along the way they had come; then he slanted 
to  the right away from  the steep edge  of the Emyn Muil,  down  the broken 
stony slopes towards the vast fens below. They faded swiftly and softly into  
the darkness. Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there 
was a black silence. 
 
