 

 
 
     Frodo was lying face upward  on the ground and the monster  was bending 
over  him, so intent  upon her victim  that she took  no heed of Sam and his 
cries, until  he was close at  hand. As he rushed up he  saw that Frodo  was 
already  bound  in  cords, wound about him from ankle to  shoulder,  and the  
monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his 
body away. 
     On  the near side of him lay, gleaming on  the ground, his elven-blade,  
where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait to  wonder wha t  
was to be  done, or whether he was brave, or loyal, or filled with rage.  He 
sprang  forward with a yell, and seized his master's sword in his left hand. 
Then he charged.  No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world 
of beasts; where  some  desperate  small creature  armed with  little  teeth 
alone,  will  spring  upon a tower of horn and  hide that  stands above  its 
fallen mate. 
     Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned 
slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was 
aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she  had known in  countless 
years,  the shining sword  bit upon her  foot  and shore away  the claw. Sam 
sprang in, inside the arches of  her legs, and  with a quick  upthrust of his 
other hand stabbed at  the clustered eyes upon her lowered  head. One  great 
eye went dark. 
     Now  the miserable creature was right under her, for the  moment out of 
the reach of her  sting and of her claws.  Her vast belly was above him with 
its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury 
held for  one more blow, and  before she could sink upon him, smothering him 
and all his little impudence of courage, he  slashed  the bright elven-blade 
across her with desperate strength. 
     But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save only her 
eyes.  Knobbed  and pitted  with corruption  was her  age-old hide, but ever  
thickened from within with  layer on layer of evil  growth. The blade scored 
it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any 
strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should  forge the steel or the hand  
of Beren or of TÂ®rin wield it. She yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up 

####-the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled 
from  the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge  bulk down  on 
him 
again.  Too  soon.  For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping  his own 
sword, with both hands he  held the  elven-blade  point upwards, fending off  
that ghastly roof; and  so  Shelob, with  the driving force of her own cruel 
will, with  strength greater than  any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a  
bitter  spike.  Deep,  deep it pricked, as Sam was  crushed  slowly  to  the 
ground. 
     No such anguish  had  Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in  all 
her long  world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor  
the most savage Orc  entrapped, had ever thus  endured  her, or set blade to 
her beloved flesh. A shudder  went through her.  Heaving up again, wrenching 
away  from the  pain,  she  bent her writhing limbs  beneath  her and sprang 
backwards in a convulsive leap. 
     Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses  reeling in the 
foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the 
mist before his eyes he was  aware  dimly of Frodo's face  and stubbornly he 
fought to  master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon 
him.  Slowly  he raised his head and saw her, only  a few paces away, eyeing 
him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom,  and a green ooze trickling from 
below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed 
upon 
the ground,  the great bows of her legs quivering, as she  gather ed  herself 
for another spring-this time to crush  and sting to death: no little bite of 
poison to  still the struggling of  her meat; this time  to slay and then to 
rend. 
     Even  as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing  his death in her  
eyes,  a  thought came  to him, as  if some remote voice had  spoken. and he 
fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and 
hard  and  solid  it seemed to  his touch  in a phantom world of horror, the 
Phial of Galadriel. 
     'Galadr iel!  ' he said  faintly, and  then he heard voices far off  but 
clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved 
shadows of the  Shire, and  the music  of the Elves as  it came  through his 
sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond. 
     Gilthoniel A Elbereth! 

####-     And then his tongue was loosed and  his voice cried in a language which  
he did not know:  
     A Elbereth Gilthoniel 
     o menel palan-diriel, 
     le nallon sn di'nguruthos! 
     A tiro nin, Fanuilos! 
     And  with  that  he staggered  to  his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, 
Hamfast's son, again. 
     `Now come, you filth!' he cried. `You've hurt my master, you brute, and 
you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on, 
and taste it again!' 
     As  if his indomitable spirit had set  its potency in motion, the glass 
blazed  suddenly like a white torch in his  hand. It flamed like a star that 
leaping from the firmament sears  the  dark  air with  intolerable light. No 
such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob's face before. The beams 
of it entered into her wounded head  and scored it with unbearable pain, and 
the  dreadful  infection of light  spread  from  eye to  eye. She  fell back  
beating  the air with her  forelegs, her   sight blasted by inner lightnings,  
her  mind  in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and 
began to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind. 
     Sam came  on. He was reeling like a drunken man,  but he came  on.  And 
Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered  as she  tried 
to  hasten from him. She  reached  the hole,  and  squeezing down, leaving a  
trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke 
at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the ground. 
     Shelob was  gone; and  whether she lay  long in her  lair, nursing  her  
malice  and her misery, and  in slow years of darkness  healed  herself from 
within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun 
once more her dreadful snares in the glens of the Mountains of  Shadow, this 
tale does not tell. 
     Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening  of the Nameless Land  fell 
upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master. 
     'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not  speak. As he had run 
forward, eager, rejoicing  to be  free,  Shelob  with hideous speed had come 
behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale, 
and heard no voice. and did not move. 
     `Master, dear  master! ' said Sam, and through  a long  silence waited. 

####-listening in vain. 
     Then as quickly as he could he  cut away the binding cords and laid his 
head upon  Frodo's  breast and to his mouth, but  no stir of life  could  he 
find, nor  feel  the  faintest flutter of  the  heart. Often  he chafed  his 
master's hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all were cold. 
     `Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone!  It's  your 
Sam calling. Don't go  where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  O wake up, 
Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!' 
     Then anger surged over hint,  and he ran  about his master's body in  a  
rage,  stabbing the air,  and smiting the  stones, and shouting  challenges.  
Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him 
in the  dusk.  And  suddenly  he  saw that he was  in the  picture  that was 
revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lurien: Frodo with a pale face 
lying fast asleep under  a great  dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had  thought 
then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And  as he  said it, as if 
the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue 
of the face grew livid green. 
     And  then black despair came down  on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, 
and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into  his heart, and he 
knew no more. 
     When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about 
him; but for how many  minutes or  hours the world had  gone dragging on  he 
could not  tell. He was still in  the  same place,  and still his master lay 
beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled  nor  the earth fallen  into 
ruin. 
     'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said.  `Did I come all this way 
with h im for  nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking 
words 
that at the time he  did not  understand  himself, at the beginning of their 
journey: I have something to do before the end. I must see  it through, sir, 
if you understand . 
     `But what can I do? Not leave  Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on  the  top of 
the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for  a 
moment 
doubt and fear  shook him. `Go on?  Is  that what I've  got to do? And leave 
him?' 
     Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, 

####-and folded his cold hands upon his breast,  and wrapped his cloak about him; 
and he laid  his own sword at one side, and the staff that Faramir had given 
at the other. 
     'If I'm  to  go on,' he  said,  `then  I must take your sword,  by your 
leave, Mr. Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the  old 
king in the barrow; and you've got your beautiful mithril coat from  old Mr. 
Bilbo. And  your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it to me and I'll  need 
it, for I'll be  always in the dark now. It's too good  for me, and the Lady 
gave it  to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do  you  understand, Mr. Frodo? 
I've got to go on.' 
     But he could not  go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could 
not release it. And time went  by and  still he knelt, holding  his master's 
hand, and in his heart keeping a debate. 
     Now he tried to find strength to tear himself  away and go  on a lonely 
journey -- for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger  would bear him down 
all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then 
Gollum would die in a corner. But that was not what he had set out to do. It 
would  not be  worth while to leave his master for  that. It would not bring 
him back. Nothing would. They had better both be dead together. And that too 
would be a lonely journey. 
     He  looked on  the bright point of the sword. He thought  of the places 
behind where there  was a black brink  and an  empty  fall into nothingness.  
There  was no  escape  that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve.  
That was not what he had set  out to do. 'What am  I to  do then? ' he cried 
again,  and now he seemed  plainly to know the hard  answer: see it through. 
Another lonely journey, and the worst. 
     `What? Me, alone, go  to the Crack of Doom and all? ' He quailed still, 
but the resolve grew. `What? Me take  the Ring from him? The Council gave it 
to him.' 
     But the answer came at  once: `And the  Council gave him companions, so 
that  the errand  should not fail.  And you are the last of all the Company. 
The errand must not fail.' 
     `I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. `I wish old Gandalf was hare or  
somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind?  I'm sure to go wrong. 
And it's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.' 
     'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been  put forward. And as 
for  not  being the right and proper person,  why,  Mr. Frodo wasn't as  you  

####-might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.' 
     `Ah well, I must make up my  own mind. I  will  make it up. But I'll be 
sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over. 
     'Let  me see  now:  if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that 
Thing's on him,  well, the Enemy  will  get it. And that's the end of all of 
us, of Lorien, and  Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to 
lose,  or it'll  be the end anyway.  The war's begun, and  more than  likely 
things are all going the Enemy's way  already. No  chance to go back with It  
and  get advice or permission.  No, it's sit here till they come and kill me 
over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.'  He drew a deep breath. 
'Then take It, it is! ' 
     He stooped. Very gently he undid  the clasp at the neck and slipped his 
hand inside Frodo's tunic;  then with his other  hand raising the  head,  he 
kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over  it.  And  then the 
head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and 
by that  more than by all  other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo  
had died and laid aside the Quest. 
     `Good-bye, master,  my dear! ' he  murmured. 'Forgive  your Sam.  He'll 
come back to  this spot when  the job's done  -- if  he manages it. And then 
he'll  not leave  you again. Rest  you quiet  till  I  come; and may no foul 
creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish, 
I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye!  ' 
     And then he bent his own  neck and put the chain upon  it, and  at once 
his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of  the Ring, as if a great 
stone  had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became  less, or  
new strength grew in him, he raised his  head, and then with a  great effort 
got to his feet and found that  he could walk and bear his burden. And for a  
moment he lifted up the Phial  and looked down at his master,  and the light  
burned gently  now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and 
in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an 
elvish beauty,  as of one who has  long  passed the  shadows. And  with  the  
bitter comfort of that last sight Sam  turned and hid the light and stumbled 
on into the growing dark. 
     He  had not far to go.  The  tunnel was some way  behind;  the  Cleft a  
couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in  the dusk` a  
deep rut worn in  ages of  passage,  running  now gently up in a long trough 
with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came  to a  

####-long flight of broad shallow steps. Now the orc-tower  was right  above him, 
frowning black, and in it the red eye  glowed. Now he was hidden in the dark 
shadow under it. He was coming to the top of  the steps and was in the Cleft  
at last. 
     'I've made up  my  mind,' he kept saying to himself.  But  he  had not. 
Though  he  had done his best  to  think it  out,  what  he  was  doing  was 
altogether against the grain  of his nature.  `Have  I  got it  wrong? '  he 
muttered. `What ought I to have done? ' 
     As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the 
actual summit,  before  he looked  at last on the  path descending into  the 
Nameless Land. he turned. For a moment, motionless  in intolerable doubt, he 
looked back. He could still see, like a small blot in  the gathering  gloom, 
the mouth  of the tunnel; and he thought he could see or  guess where  Frodo  
lay. He fancied there was a glimmer on the ground  down there, or perhaps it 
was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at that high stony place where 
all his life had fallen in ruin. 
     'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, `to go back and 
find him! '  Then  at last he turned to  the  road in front and took  a  few 
steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken. 
     Only a few steps; and now only a  few more and  he would be going  down 
and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly  he heard cries 
and voices. He stood still as  stone.  Orc-voices. They were behind him  and 
before him.  A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts:  Orcs were coming up 
to  the  Cleft from the  far side, from  some entry to  the tower,  perhaps.  
Tramping feet and shouts behind. He  wheeled round. He saw small red lights, 
torches, winking away below there as they  issued  from the tunnel. At  last  
the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught. 
     Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was 
very near. In a  minute they would reach the top and be on  him. He had taken 
too long in making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape, 
or save himself, or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought 
or  decision. He simply found himself drawing  out the  chain and taking the 
Ring in his hand.  The head of  the  orc-company appeared in the Cleft right  
before him. Then he put it on. 
     The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an  hour  
of thought. At once he was aware that  hearing was sharpened while sight was 
dimmed, but otherwise than in  Shelob's  lair. All things about him now were 

####-not dark but vague; while he himself was there in  a grey hazy world, alone,  
like a small black solid rock and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was 
like an orb of hot gold. He did not feel invisible at  all, but horribly and 
uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him. 
     He heard the  crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul 
Vale;  and down away under the rock the bubbling misery  of Shelob, groping, 
lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the 
cries of the Orcs  as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in 
his ears, the crash of the feet  a nd the  rending clamour of the Orcs before 
him.  He  shrank  against the cliff. But  they marched  up  like  a  phantom 
company,  grey distorted  figures in a mist, only  dreams of  fear with pale 
flames in their hands. And they passed him  by. He  cowered , trying to creep  
away into some cranny and to hide. 
     He listened.  The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had 
sighted one another,  and  both parties were now hurrying  and  shouting. He 
heard them both clearly, and he understood what they  said. Perhaps the Ring 
gave understanding of tongues,  or simply  understanding, especially  of the  
servants  of  Sauron  its maker, so that if he gave heed,  he understood and 
translated  the thought  to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in 
power  as it approached the places of its forging; but one  thing it did not 
confer, and that  was courage. At present Sam  still thought only of hiding, 
of lying low till all  was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He  could 
not tell how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.  
     'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? ' 
     'Orders, you lubber. And what are  you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking 
up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? ' 
     'Orders to  you.  I'm in command  of this pass.  So speak civil. What's 
your report?  ' 
     'Nothing.' 
     `Hai!  hai! yoi!'  A yell  broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The 
Orcs lower down  had  suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the 
others. 
     `Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in  the road. A spy, a spy! ' 
There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.  
     With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They 
had 
seen  his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make 

####-the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He  sprang up. He flung the Quest  
and all his decisions away, and fear and doubt with them.  He knew now where 
his place was  and had been: at  his master's side, though what he  could do 
there  was not clear. Back  he  ran down the  steps, down the  path  towards 
Frodo. 
     `How many are there?'  he  thought. `Thirty or forty  from the tower at 
least, and  a  lot more than  that  from down below, I guess. How many can I 
kill before they get  me? They'll see the flame of  the  sword, as soon as I 
draw it, and they'll get me  sooner or later. I wonder if any song will ever  
mention it: How Samwise  fell  in  the High Pass and made  a wall of  bodies 
round his master. No,  no song. Of course not, for the Ring'll be found, and 
there'll be  no more songs. I can't help it. My place is  by Mr. Frodo. They 
must understand that  --  Elrond  and the Council, and  the  great Lords and 
Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans  have gone wrong. I can't be their 
Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.' 
     But the  Orcs were  out  of his dim sight now. He  had  had no  time to 
consider himself, but now he  realized  that he was  weary, weary almost  to  
exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He was  too slow. The 
path seemed miles long. Where had they all got to in the mist?  
     There they were  again!  A good way  ahead still. A cluster of  figures 
round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and 
that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt. 
     'Come on, Sam!  ' he said, `or you'll be too late  again.' He  loosened 
the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then-- 
     There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted 
from the ground. 'Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up! ' 
     Then a  voice shouted: `Now off! The quick way. Back to  the Undergate! 
She'll  not  trouble us  tonight  by  all  the signs.'  The  whole  band  of 
orc-figures  began  to move. Four in the middle were carrying a body high on 
their shoulders. `Ya hoi!  ' 
     They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up. 
Still he laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in. Those 
with the  burden  went  first, and  behind them  there  was a  good  deal of 
struggling  and  jostling. Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue 
in his  wavering hand, but they did not see it. Even as  he came panting up, 
the last of them vanished into the black hole. 
     For a moment he stood, gasping,  clutching his breast. Then he drew his 

####-sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears.  'Curse 
the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.  
     It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if 
he  had  stepped out of  a thin mist into  a heavier fog. His  weariness was 
growing but his will  hardened  all the more. He thought  he  could  see the 
light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch 
them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this  tunnel  they  knew well.; for in 
spite of Shelob they were forced  to use it  often as the swiftest  way from 
the Dead City over the mountains. In  what far -off time  the main tunnel and 
the great round  pit had been  made, where Shelob had  taken up her abode in 
ages past. they did not  know: but many byways they  had  themselves  delved 
about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro 
on  the business of their masters.  Tonight they  did not intend to  go  far 
down. but  were  hastening to find  a side-passage  that  led back  to their 
watch-tower on  the cliff. Must of  them were gleeful,  delighted with  what 
they had found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after the 
fashion of their kind. Sam heard the  noise  of their harsh voices, flat and 
hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices from among all the 
rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The  captains of the  two parties 
seemed to  be bringing up the rear, debating as they went. 
     'Can't you  stop your rabble  making such a racket, Shagrat? '  grunted 
the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.' 
     `Go on, Gorbag! Yours are  making  more than half the noise,'  said the 
other.  `But let the  lads play! No need to worry about  Shelob for a bit, I 
reckon. She's sat on a nail, it  seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't  
you see: a nasty  mess all the way  back to  that cursed crack  of  hers? If 
we've stopped it once, we've stopped it  a  hundred times. So let 'em laugh. 
And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that LugbÂ®rz wants.' 
     'LugbÂ®rz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me, 
but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? ' 
     'Don't know till we've had a look.' 
     'Oho! So they  haven't  told you what to expect? They don't tell us all 
they  know, do  they? Not by  half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top 
Ones can.' 
     `Sh, Gorbag!'  Shagrat's voice  was  lowered, so  tha t  even  with  his 
strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just  catch  what was said. 'They 
may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as 

####-not.  But there's no  doubt about it, they're troubled about something.  The 
Nazgyl  down below are, by your account; and LugbÂ®rz is too. Something 
nearly 
slipped.' 
     `Nearly, you say! ' said Gorbag. 
     `All right,' said Shagrat, `but we'll  talk of that later: Wait till we 
get to the Under -way.  There's a place there where  we can talk a bit, while 
the lads go on.' 
     Shortly  afterwards  Sam saw the  torches  disappear. Then there  was a  
rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as  he could guess 
the Orcs  had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo  and  he  had 
tried and found blocked. It was still blocked. 
     There  seemed to be a  great stone  in  the  way,  but the Orcs had got 
through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were 
still running  along, deeper and deeper into the mountain,  back towards the 
tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some 
foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and 
he  threw himself against it, but it did not  yield. Then not far inside, or 
so he thought,  he  heard the two captains' voices talking  again.  He stood 
still  listening  for a little  hoping  perhaps  to learn something  useful. 
Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and 
he 
could then slip in. 
     `No,  I  don't  know,' said  Gorbag's voice. `The messages  go  through 
quicker  than anything could fly, as a rule. But I  don't  enquire how  it's 
done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgyl give me the creeps. And they skin the 
body off you as soon as  look at you, and leave  you all cold in the  dark on 
the  other side. But He likes 'em;  they're His favourites nowadays, so it's 
no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in the city.' 
     `You should try being up here with Shelob for company,' said Shagrat. 
     'I'd like to try somewhere where there's  none of 'em. But the war's on 
now, and when that's over things may be easier.' 
     `It's going well, they say.' 
     'They would.' grunted  Gorbag. `We'll  see. But anyway, if  it does  go 
well,  there should  be  a lot more  room. What d'you  say?   -- if we get  a 
chance, you and me'll slip  off  and set up somewhere on our  own with a few 
trusty lads, somewhere  where there's good  loot nice and handy, and no  big  

####-bosses.' 
     'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.' 
     `Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As 
I  said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice  sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even 
the  Biggest,  can  make mistakes. Something  nearly slipped you say. I say, 
something has slipped. And we've got to  look out. Always the poor  Uruks to 
put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't  love 
us  any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done 
too. But see here: when were you ordered out? ' 
     `About an hour ago,  just  before you  saw us.  A message  came: Nazgyl 
uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to  head of Stairs. 
I came at once.' 
     'Bad business,'  said Gorbag.  `See  here  -- our Silent  Watchers were 
uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out 
for another  day, nor any message sent to LugbÂ®rz either: owing to the Great 
Signal going up, and the High Nazgyl going off to the war, and all that. And 
then they couldn't get LugbÂ®rz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.' 
     `The Eye  was busy elsewhere,  I  suppose,'  said Shagrat.  `Big things 
going on away west, they say.' 
     'I daresay,' growled Gorbag.  `But in the meantime enemies  have got up 
the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're  supposed to  keep watch, aren't 
you, special orders or no? What are you for?' 
     `That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right.  
We knew there were funny things going on.' 
     `Very funny!  ' 
     `Yes, very funny: lights  and  shouting and all. But Shelob was on  the 
go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.' 
     `Her Sneak? What's that? ' 
     `You  must  have  seen  him:  little thin  black  fellow; like a spider  
himself, or perhaps more lik e a starved frog. He's  been  here  before. Came 
out of LugbÂ®rz the first time, years  ago,  and  we had word from High Up to 
let  him pass.  He's been up the Stairs once  or twice since then, but we've 
left him  alone: seems  to  have some  understanding with  Her  Ladyship.  I  
suppose he's no good to eat:  she wouldn't  worry about words from High  Up. 
But a  fine guard you keep in the valley:  he  was up here a day  before all 
this racket. Early last  night we  saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her  
Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good  enough for me, until the 

####-message came.  I thought  her  Sneak had  brought her a toy. or  that  you'd 
perhaps  sent  her a present,  a  prisoner  of  war  or  something. I  don't 
interfere  when  she's pla ying.  Nothing gets by  Shelob  when  she's on the 
hunt.' 
     'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you  I'm 
not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs, did  get by. It cut her web  
and got clean out of the hole. That's something to think about! ' 
     `Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she? ' 
     `Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if  he was the only one then 
she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And 
if LugbÂ®rz wanted him, you'd  have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there 
was more than one.' 
     At this point Sam began to listen  more attentively and pressed his ear 
against the stone. 
     'Who cut the cords she'd  put round  him, Shagrat? Same one  as cut the 
web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I 
reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? ' 
     Shagrat made no reply. 
     `You may  well put  your  thinking cap on,  if you've  got one. It's no 
laughing matter. No  one, no one  has ever stuck a  pin in Shelob before, as 
you  should  know well enough.  There's no  grief in that; but think -there's 
someone  loose hereabouts  as is more dangerous than any other  damned rebel 
that ever  walked since the bad old times, since the  Great Siege. Something  
has slipped.' 
     `And what is it then? ' growled Shagrat. 
     `By all the  signs, Captain  Shagrat, I'd say there's  a  large warrior  
loose,  Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe: 
and he's loose in your bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny 
indeed! ' Gorbag spat. Sam smiled grimly at this description of himself.  
     'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy  view.'  said  Shagrat. 'You can 
read the signs how you like, but there  may be  other   ways to explain them. 
Anyhow. I've  got watchers  at every point, and  I'm  going to deal with one 
thing at a  time. When  I've had  a look at the fellow we have caught,  then 
I'll begin to worry  
 
1cb2 
 

####-about something else.' 
     `It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag. 
'He may have had nothing to  do  with the real mischief. The big fellow with 
the sharp sword doesn't seem to have thought him  worth much  anyhow  -- just  
left him lying: regular elvish trick.' 
     `We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go  and have a look 
at the prisoner! 
     `What  are  you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. 
If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.' 
     'Now, now,' growled  Shagrat. 'I  have my  orders. And it's more than my 
belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em. Any trespasser found by the  guard is 
to  be held at the  tower. Prisoner is  to be stripped. Full description  of 
every  article, garment, weapon,  letter,  ring. or trinket is to be sent to 
LugbÂ®rz at once, and to  LugbÂ®rz only . And  the prisoner is to be  kept safe  
and intact,  under pain  of death for every member  of  the guard, until  He 
sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough,  and that's what I'm  going  to 
do.' 
     'Stripped, eh? ' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? ' 
     `No,  none of that. He's for LugbÂ®rz,  I tell you. He's wanted safe and 
whole.' 
     'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion 
now. What LugbÂ®rz will do with such  stuff I can't guess. He might as well go 
in the pot.' 
     'You  fool,'  snarled Shagrat.  'You've been talking very  clever,  but 
there's a lot you don't  know, though most other folk do. You'll be  for the 
pot or for Shelob, if you don't take  care. Carrion! Is that all you know of 
Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords,  she's after meat. She  doesn't eat 
dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! ' 
     Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if  the whole dark world 
was turning upside  down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but 
even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware 
of the  comment: 'You  fool, he  isn't dead, and your heart  knew  it. Don't  
trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part  of you. The  trouble with 
you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? ' Fur the  
moment nothing, but to prop himself against the  unmoving  stone and listen, 
listen to the vile orc-voices. 
     `Garn!'  said  Shagrat. 'She's got more than  one  poison.  When  she's 

####-hunting, she just gives 'em a dab in the neck and  they go as limp as  boned 
fish, and then she has her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost  
him for days.  Then we found him in a corner;  hanging up he was, but he was 
wide awake  and glaring. How we laughed! She'd  forgotten him, maybe, but 
we 
didn't  touch him-no  good interfering with Her. Nar  -- this  little filth, 
he'll wake up, in  a few hours; and  beyond feeling a  bit sick for  a  hit, 
he'll be  all right. Or would  be,  if LugbÂ®rz  would let him alone. And  of 
course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.' 
     'And what's going to happen to him,' laughed Gorbag. 'We can tell him a  
few stories at  any rate, if we can't do a nything else. I don't suppose he's 
ever been in lovely LugbÂ®rz, so he may  like to know what to expect. This is 
going to be more funny than I thought. Let's go!' 
     `There's going to be no fun, I tell  you,' said Shagrat.  'And he's got 
to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.' 
     `AII  right! But if I  were you, I'd catch the  big one  that's  loose, 
before you send in any report to LugbÂ®rz. It  won't sound too pretty  to say 
you've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.' 
     The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He 
was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. `I got it all  
wrong!  ' he cried. `I knew I  would. Now they've  got him, the  devils! the 
filth! Never leave your master, never,  never: that was my right rule. And I 
knew  it in my heart. May  I be forgiven!  Now I've got to get  back to him. 
Somehow, somehow!  ' 
     He  drew his sword again and  beat on the stone with the  hilt, but  it 
only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, bla zed so brightly now  that 
he could see dimly  in its light. To his surprise he noticed  that the great 
block was shaped like a heavy door, and  was less than twice his own height. 
Above it was a  dark blank  space between the top and the  low  arch of  the 
opening.  It was probably only meant to be a stop against the  intrusion  of 
Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt  beyond the reach  of 
her cunning. With  his  remaining  strength  Sam leaped and caught the  top,  
scrambled up, and dropped;  and  then he ran  madly, sword blazing in  hand, 
round a bend and up a winding tunnel. 
     The news  that his master was still alive roused him  to a  last effort 
beyond thought  of weariness. He could not see anything  ahead. for this new 
passage twisted and turned constantly; but  he thought  he was  catching the  

####-two Orcs up: their  voices were growing  nearer again. Now they seemed quite 
close. 
     `That's what I'm going  to do,'  said Shagrat in angry tones.  'Put him 
right up in the top chamber.' 
     `What for? ' growled Gorbag. `Haven't you any lock -ups down below? ' 
     `He's  going out of harm's way,  I  tell  you,' answered Shagrat. 'See?  
He's  precious.  I  don't trust  all  my lads,  and  none of yours;  nor you  
neither, when you're mad for fun. He's going where I want him, and where you  
won't come,  if you  don't keep civil. Up to the top,  I  say. He'll be safe 
there.' 
     `Will  he?'  said Sam. 'You're  forgetting the great big elvish warrior  
that's loose!' And with that he raced  round   the last corner, only to  find 
that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the Ring gave him, 
he had misjudged the distance. 
     The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could  see  them now,  
black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an 
incline;  and  at  the  end, wide open,  were  great  double doors,  leading 
probably to deep  chambers far below the high horn of the tower. Already the 
Orcs  with their burden  had  passed inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing 
near the gate. 
     Sam  heard a burst  of hoarse singing, blaring of horns  and banging of 
gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold. 
     Sam yelled  and brandished Sting, but his little  voice was  drowned in 
the tumult. No one heeded him. 
     The  great  doors slammed to. Boom.  The bars  of iron fell  into place 
inside. Clang.  The gate was  shut.  Sam  hurled  himself against the bolted 
brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He  was out in the darkness. 
Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy. 
  

####- 
    Here ends the second part of the history of the War of the Ring. 
 
     The third  part tells of  the  last defence against the Shadow, and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in  THE RETURN OF THE KING . 
 
 
 
 

####-####- 

 
 

 * BOOK V *  

Chapter 1. Minas Tirith 

 
 
     Pippin  looked out from  the shelter of Gandalf's cloak. He wondered if 
he was awake or still sleeping, still in the  swift-moving dream in which he 
had  been  wrapped so long since the  great  ride  began. The dark world was 
rushing by and  the wind sang loudly in his ears. He could  see nothing  but 
the wheeling stars, and away to his right vast shadows against the sky where 
the mountains of the  South  marched past.  Sleepily he tried  to reckon the 
times and stages of their journey, but his memory was drowsy and uncertain. 
     There  had been the first  ride at terrible speed without  a  halt, and 
then in the dawn he had  seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the 
silent  town  and the great empty house on  the  hill.  And  hardly had they 
reached its shelter when the winged shadow  had passed  over once again, and 
men wilted with fear. But Gandalf had spoken  soft words to him,  and he had 
slept in a corner, tired but uneasy, dimly aware of  comings  and goings and  
of men talking and Gandalf giving orders. And then  again riding, riding  in 
the  night. This was the second, no, the third night since  he had looked in 
the Stone. And with that hideous memory he woke fully, and shivered, and the 
noise of the wind became filled with menacing voices.  
     A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers 
Pippin  cowered back, afraid for  a  moment,  wondering  into what  dreadful 
country Gandalf was bearing him. He rubbed his eyes, and then he saw that it 
was the moon rising above the eastern shadows, now  almost at  the full.  So 
the night was not  yet  old and  for hours the dark journey  would go on. He 
stirred and spoke. 
     'Where are we, Gandalf?' he asked. 
     'In the realm of Gondor,' the wizard answered. 'The land  of Anurien is 
still passing by.' 
     There was a silence again  for a  while. Then,  'What  is that?'  cried 
Pippin  suddenly,  clutching at Gandalf's cloak.  'Look! Fire, red fire! Are 
there dragons in this land?  Look, there is another!' 
     For  answer  Gandalf  cried aloud to his horse. 'On, Shadowfax! We must  

####-hasten. Time is  short.  See! The beacons of Gondor are  alight, calling for  
aid. War  is  kindled.  See,  there is the  fire  on Amon  Don, and flame on 
Eilenach;  and  there they go speeding  west:  Nardol,  Erelas,  Min-Rimmon, 
Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.' 
     But Shadowfax  paused in  his stride, slowing  to  a  walk, and then he 
lifted up his head and neighed. And out of the  darkness the answering neigh  
of other  horses came; and  presently the  thudding of hoofs was heard,  and 
three riders swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished  
into the West. Then Shadowfax gathered himself together and sprang away, 
and 
the night flowed over him like a roaring wind. 
     Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling 
him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built 
on the tops  of  outlying hills along both border s  of the great  range, and 
maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness 
to bear  his errand-riders to  Rohan in the North,  or  to Belfalas  in  the 
South. 'It is long since the beacons of the North  were lit,' he said;  'and 
in the ancient days of  Gondor they were not needed, for  they had the Seven  
Stones.' Pippin stirred uneasily. 
     'Sleep  again, and do  not be  afraid!' said Gandalf. 'For you are  not 
going like Frodo to  Mordor, but  to Minas Tirith, and there you  will be as 
safe as you can  be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or  the Ring is 
taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.' 
     'You do not comfort me,' said Pippin, but nonetheless  sleep crept over  
him. The last  thing that he remembered before he fell into deep dream was a 
glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like floating isles above the clouds 
as they caught the light of the westering moon. He wondered where Frodo was,  
and if he was already in Mordor, or if he was dead; and he did not know that 
Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the 
coming of the day. 
     Pippin woke  to  the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night 
of journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again, 
and chill grey mists were about them.  Shadowfax stood  steaming with sweat, 
but he held his neck proudly and showed  no sign of weariness. Many tall men 
heavily cloaked  stood beside him, and behind them in the mist loomed a wall 
of stone. Partly ruinous  it seemed, but already before the night was passed 
the sound  of  hurried labour  could  be heard:  beat  of hammers,  clink of 

####-trowels,  and the creak of wheels. Torches and flares glowed dully here  and 
there in the fog. Gandalf was speaking  to the men that  barred his way, and 
as he listened Pippin became aware that he himself was being discussed. 
     'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader  of the men, 'and 
you know the pass-words of the  Seven  Gates and are free to go forward. But 
we do not know your companion. What  is he?  A dwarf out of the mountains 
in 
the North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be 
mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.' 
     'I will vouch  for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. 'And 
as  for valour,  that  cannot be computed by stature. He has  passed through 
more  battles and  perils than you have,  Ingold, though  you  be twice  his 
height; and  he comes  now  from the storming of Isengard,  of which we bear 
tidings,  and great weariness is  on him, or  I would wake him. His name  is 
Peregrin, a very valiant man.' 
     'Man?' said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed. 
     'Man!' cried Pippin,  now  thoroughly roused.  'Man! Indeed not! I am a  
hobbit and no more valiant  than I am a man,  save perhaps  now and again by 
necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!' 
     'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold.  'But what 
is a hobbit?' 
     'A Halfling,' answered Gandalf. 'Nay,  not the one that was spoken of,' 
he added seeing  the  wonder  in the  men's  faces. 'Not  he, yet one of his 
kindred.' 
     'Yes, and one  who  journeyed  with him,' said Pippin. 'And  Boromir of 
your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the  
last he was slain defending me from many foes.' 
     'Peace!'  said Gandalf.  'The news of that grief should have  been told 
first to the father.' 
     'It  has  been  guessed  already,' said  Ingold;  'for there have  been 
strange portents here  of late. But pass  on now  quickly! For  the  Lord of 
Minas Tirith  will be eager to see any that bear the  latest tidings of  his 
son, be he man or --' 
     'Hobbit,' said Pippin.  'Little  service  can I offer to your lord, but 
what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.' 
     'Fare you well!' said  Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and 
he  passed through a narrow gate in the wall. 'May you bring good counsel to 

####-Denethor  in his need, and  to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold  cried.  'But you  
come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.' 
     'Because I come seldom but  when my help  is needed,' answered Gandalf.  
'And as for counsel, to you I would  say that you are over -late in repairing 
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will  now be your best defence against the 
storm that is at  hand - that and such  hope as  I  bring. For not  all  the 
tidings that I  bring are  evil.  But leave your  trowels  and  sharpen your 
swords!' 
     'The work will be finished ere evening, ' said Ingold. 'This is the last  
portion of  the wall  to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it 
looks  towards our  friends of Rohan.  Do  you know aught of them? Will they 
answer the summons, think you?' 
     'Yes,  they will come. But  they have fought many battles at your back. 
This road and no road looks towards safety  any longer. Be vigilant! But for  
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host  of foes coming  out of 
Anurien 
and no Riders of Rohan. And you may yet. Fare you well, and sl eep not!' 
     Gandalf passed now into  the wide land  beyond the Rammas Echor. So the 
men of Gondor  called the out  wall that they had  built with great  labour, 
after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more 
it ran from the  mountains' feet  and so back again, enclosing in its  fence 
the fields of the Pelennor:  fair and fertile townlands  on  the long slopes 
and terraces falling to the deep levels of the Anduin. At its furthest point 
from the  Great Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall  was four leagues 
distant, and there from a frowning bank  it overlooked the long flats beside 
the river,  and men had  made it high and strong; for at  that point, upon a  
walled causeway, the  road came in from  the fords and bridges  of Osgiliath 
and passed  through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its  nearest 
point the  wall was little more than one league from the  City, and that was 
south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a  wide knee about the  hills of Emyn 
Arnen in South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and  the out-wall rose  upon its 
very  brink; and beneath  it lay  the quays and  landings of the Harlond for  
craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.  
     The  townlands  were rich,  with  wide  tilth  and many  orchards,  and 
homesteads there  were with oast  and garner, fold and byre, and  many rills 
rippling through  the  green from the  highlands  down  to Anduin.  Yet  the 

####-herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part 
of 
the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the  City, or in the high 
vales of  the  mountain-borders,  in Lossarnach,  or  further south  in fair 
Lebennin with its five swift streams. There dwelt  a  hardy folk between the 
mountains and the sea. They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood 
was 
mingled, and there were short  and swarthy  folk among them whose sires came 
more from the forgotten men who  housed in  the  shadow  of the hills in the 
Dark  Years  ere the coming of the kings. But  beyond,  in the great fief of 
Belfalas, dwelt Prince Imrahil  in  his castle of Dol Amroth by the sea, and 
he was of high blood,  and  his folk also, tall  men and proud with sea -grey 
eyes. 
     Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the 
sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a sea of mist, 
rising  to a  bleak  shadow  in the  East;  but to his right great mountains 
reared their heads, ranging  from the West  to a steep and sudden end, as if 
in  the  making of the land the  River  had burst  through a great  barrier, 
carving  out a mighty valley to be a  land  of battle and debate in times to 
come. And there where the White Mountains of Ered Nimrais  came to their 
end 
he saw, as Gandalf had promised, the dark mass of Mount  Mindolluin, the deep 
purple  shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising 
day. And upon its out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven walls 
of stone  so  strong and  old that  it seemed to have been  not builded  but 
carven by giants out of the bones of the earth. 
     Even  as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls  passed from  looming grey to 
white, blushing faintly in  the dawn;  and suddenly the sun climbed over the 
eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that  smote the face of the City. Then 
Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower  of  Ecthelion, standing high  within  the 
topmost walls' shone  out against the  sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl 
and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle  glittered as if  it 
were wrought of crystals;  and white  banners  broke and  fluttered from the 
battlements in the morning breeze' and high and far he heard a clear ringing 
as of silver trumpets. 
     So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate  of the Men of Gondor at 
the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before them. 

####-     'Mithrandir!  Mithrandir!' men  cried. 'Now we know that  the  storm is 
indeed nigh!' 
     'It is upon you,' said  Gandalf. 'I  have  ridden  on its wings. Let me 
pass!  I  must come  to  your  Lord Denethor, while his  stewardship  lasts.  
Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have 
known. 
Let me pass!' 
     Then men  fell back before the command of his voice  and questioned him 
no further, though  they gazed in wonder  at the hobbit that sat before  him 
and at the horse that bore him. For the people of  the City used horses very 
little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by  
the errand-riders of their  lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one  of the 
great steeds of the  King  of  Rohan?  Maybe  the Rohirrim will come soon to 
strengthen us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road. 
     For the  fashion  of  Minas Tirith was such that it was built on  seven 
levels,  each  delved into the hill, and about each  was set a  wall, and in 
each wall was a  gate. But the gates were not set in a line:  the Great Gate 
in the City Wall was at  the  east  point of the circuit, but the next faced 
half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the 
paved  way that climbed towards  the Citadel turned  first this way and then 
that across the face of  the hill. And each  time that it passed the line of 
the  Great Gate it went through an  arched  tunnel, piercing a  vast pier of 
rock whose  huge out-thrust bulk  divided in two all the circles of the City 
save the first. For partly in  the  primeval shaping  of the hill, partly by 
the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide 
court behind the  Gate a  towering  bastion  of stone, its edge sharp  as  a  
ship-keel facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the  topmost circle, 
and there was crowned  by  a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might, 
like mariners in a mountainous ship, look  from  its peak sheer down upon the 
Gate  seven  hundred  feet  below.  The entrance  to the Citadel also looked 
eastward,  but  was delved in the  heart of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit 
slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus  men reached  at last the High Court, 
and the Place of the  Fountain before the feet of the  White Tower: tall and 
shapely,  fifty fathoms from its  base to the pinnacle, where the banner  of 
the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain. 
     A  strong citadel  it was indeed,  and  not to be taken  by  a  host of 
enemies, if  there were any within that could hold weapons;  unless some foe 

####-could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin, and so come upon 
the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain  mass. But 
that shoulder, which rose to  the height of the fifth wall, was hedged  with 
great ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung its western end;  and 
in that  space stood the houses and  domed tombs of bygone kings  and lords, 
for ever silent between the mountain and the tower. 
     Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and more 
splendid  than  anything that he had dreamed of;  greater and  stronger than 
Isengard, and far more beautiful.  Yet it was in truth falling year by  year 
into decay; and already it lacked half the men that could have dwelt at ease 
there. In  every street they passed  some  great house or  court  over whose 
doors and arched gates were carved many fair letters  of strange and ancient  
shapes: names Pippin  guessed of great men and kindreds that had once  dwelt 
there;  and  yet now they were silent,  and no footsteps rang  on their wide 
pavements, nor voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out  from 
door or empty window.  
     At last they came out of  shadow to the seventh gate,  and the warm sun 
that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien, 
glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars, and the great arch  with  
keystone  carven  in  the  likeness of a crowned and  kingly  head.  Gandalf 
dismounted, for no horse was allowed in the Citadel,  and Shadowfax suffered 
himself to be led away at the soft word of his master. 
     The Guards of the gate  were robed  in black, and  their helms  were of 
strange  shape, high-crowned,  with long cheek -guards  close-fitting to  the 
face,  and above the cheek -guards were set the white wings of sea -birds; but 
the helms gleamed with a  flame of silver, for they were indeed  wrought  of 
mithril, heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon  the black surcoats were 
embroidered in white a tree blossoming like  snow beneath a silver crown and 
many-pointed  stars. This  was the livery of the heirs of  Elendil, and none 
wore it now in all Gondor,  save the Guards of the Citadel  before the Court 
of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown. 
     Already it  seemed that word of their coming had  gone before them: and 
at once they were admitted,  silently, and without question. Quickly Gandalf 
strode across  the white-paved court.  A  sweet fountain played there in the 
morning sun,  and a  sward of bright green  lay about it; but in the  midst. 
drooping over the pool,  stood  a dead  tree, and  the falling drops dripped 
sadly from its barren and broken branches back into the clear water. 

####-     Pippin glanced at  it  as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, 
he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was  left in  this place where 
everything else was well tended. 
     Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree. 
     The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into  his mind. And  then 
he found himself at the doors of  the great hall beneath the gleaming tower; 
and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door -wardens and entered the 
cool echoing shadows of the house of stone. 
     They walked  down  a paved passage, long and  empty, and  as  they went 
Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. 'Be careful of your  words, Master Peregrin!  
This is  no time for  hobbit pertness. Thjoden is a kindly old man. Denethor  
is of another  sort, proud and subtle,  a  man  of far  greater  lineage and 
power, though  he is  not called a king. But he will  speak most to you, and 
question you much, since you  can tell him  of his son Boromir. He loved him 
greatly: too much  perhaps; and the more  so because they  were  unlike. But 
under cover  of  this love he will think it easier to  learn what he witches 
from you rather than  from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave 
quiet  the matter of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due  time. And 
say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.' 
     'Why  not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin  whispered. 'He meant to 
come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.' 
     'Maybe,  maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely  to be 
in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At 
least he should come unheralded by us.' 
     Gandalf halted  before a  tall  door of  polished  metal. 'See,  Master  
Pippin,  there  is no  t ime to instruct  you now in  the history of  Gondor; 
though it might have been  better, if you  had learned something of it, when 
you were  still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods  of the Shire. 
Do as I bid! It  is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his 
heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the  coming of one who  will, if 
he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?' 
     'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed. 
     'Yes,' said  Gandalf.  'If you  have  walked all these days with closed 
ears and mind asleep, wake up now!' He knocked on the door. 
     The door opened,  but no one could be  seen  to open it.  Pippin looked 
into a great hall. It was  lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at  either  
side, beyond  the rows of tall  pillars that upheld the  roof. Monoliths  of 

####-black marble, they  rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of 
beasts and leaves; and far above in  shadow  the wide  vaulting gleamed with 
dull  gold, inset with  flowing traceries of  many colours. No  hangings nor  
storied webs, nor  any things of woven stuff or  of wood, were to be seen in 
that long solemn hall; but between the pillars there stood  a silent company 
of tall images graven in cold stone. 
     Suddenly Pippin was  reminded  of  the hewn rocks of  Argonath, and awe 
fell on him, as he looked down  that  avenue of kings  long dead. At the far 
end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble 
shaped like a crowned helm; behind  it was carved upon the wall and set with 
gems an image of a tree  in flower. But the throne was empty. At the foot of 
the dais, upon the lowest step which was broad and deep, there  was  a stone 
chair,  black and unadorned, and on it sat an  old man gazing at his lap. In 
his hand was a  white rod  with a  golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly 
they paced the long floor towards him, until they stood three paces from his 
footstool. Then Gandalf spoke. 
     'Hail, Lord  and Steward of Minas Tirith,  Denethor son of Ecthelion! I 
am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.' 
     Then  the old  man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its proud 
bones  and skin like ivory, and the long  curved nose between  the dark deep 
eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragor n.  'Dark 
indeed 
is the hour,' said  the old  man, 'and  at such times you are  wont to come, 
Mithrandir.  But though all  the  signs forebode that the  doom of Gondor is 
drawing  nigh, less now to me is  that darkness than my own darkness. It has 
been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?' 
     'It is,' said Gandalf. 'One  of the twain. The other is with Thjoden of 
Rohan and may come hereafter.  Halflings  they are,  as you see, yet this is 
not he of whom the omens spoke.' 
     'Yet  a  Halfling still,' said Denethor  grimly, 'and little love do  I 
bear the name, since those  accursed words  came to trouble our counsels and 
drew away my son on the  wild errand to his  death. My Boromir!  Now we 
have 
need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.' 
     'He would  have  gone,' said  Gandalf.  'Be not unjust  in your  grief!  
Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was 
a masterful man, and one  to take what he desired. I journeyed far  with him 

####-and learned much of  his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news 
of that ere we came?' 
     'I  have received  this,'  said Denethor, and laying  down his  rod  he 
lifted from his lap the  thing that  he had been gazing at.  In each hand he 
held up one half  of a great  horn cloven through the middle: a wild-ox horn 
bound with silver. 
     'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin. 
     'Verily,'  said  Denethor. 'And in  my turn  I bore it, and so did each 
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing 
of the kings, since  Vorondil father  of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw 
in the  far fields of Rhyn. I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches 
thirteen  days ago, and the River brought  it to me, broken: it will wind no 
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black 
glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?' 
     'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be 
so. Yes, I stood beside him,  as he blew the  horn. But  no help  came. Only 
more orcs.' 
     'So,' said  Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there?  
Tell me more! Why did no help  come? And how  did you escape, and yet he 
did 
not, so mighty a man as he wa s, and only orcs to withstand him?' 
     Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain  by 
one arrow,'  he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by  many. When last I saw him 
he sank  beside  a tree and plucked a black -feathered shaft  from  his side. 
Then I swooned  and was made  captive. I saw him no more, and know  no 
more. 
But I honour his memory,  for he was very  valiant.  He died to save  us, my 
kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by  the  soldiery  of  the 
Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.' 
     Then Pippin looked the old man in  the eye, for pride stirred strangely 
within  him, still stung  by  the scorn  and suspicion in that  cold  voice. 
'Little service, no  doubt, will so great a lord of Men  think to  find in a  
hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I  will offer  
it,  in payment  of my  debt.'  Twitching  aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew 
forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet. 
     A pale smile, like a gleam of  cold sun  on a winter's evening,  passed 
over the old man's face; but he  bent his head and held out his hand, laying 

####-the shards of the horn aside. 'Give me the weapon!' he said. 
     Pippin lifted it  and presented the hilt  to him.   'Whence  came this?' 
said Denethor.  'Many, many years lie on it.  Surely this is a blade wrought 
by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?' 
     'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country ' said 
Pippin.  'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell  
more of them.' 
     'I see that strange tales  are woven about you,'  said  Denethor,  'and 
once again it  is shown  that looks may belie the man  -  or the  halfling. I 
accept  your  service.  For you  are not  daunted  by  words;  and you  have 
courteous  speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South. 
And we shall have  need of all folk of courtesy, be they great  or small, in 
the days to come. Swear to me now!' 
     'Take the hilt,' said Gandalf,  'and speak after the Lord, if  you  are 
resolved on this.' 
     'I am,' said Pippin. 
     The  old man laid  the  sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to 
the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor: 
     'Here do I swear  fealty and  service  to  Gondor, and  to the Lord and 
Steward of the realm, to  speak and to be silent,  to do and  to let be,  to 
come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living or dying, from 
this hour  henceforth, until my  lord  release me, or death take me , or  the 
world end. So say I, Peregrin son of Paladin of the Shire of the Halflings.' 
     And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord  of Gondor, Steward 
of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is 
given: fealty with love, valour with honour, oath - breaking with vengeance.' 
Then Pippin received back his sword and put it in its sheath. 
     'And now,' said  Denethor, 'my first command  to you: speak and be  not 
silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that  you can of 
Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!' As he  spoke  he  struck a small silver  
gong  that  stood  near his footstool,  and at  once  servants came forward. 
Pippin saw then that they had been standing in alcoves on either side of the 
door, unseen as he and Gandalf entered. 
     'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see 
that none trouble us for one hour.' 
     'It is all that  I have to spare,  for there is  much else to heed,' he 
said  to Gandalf.  'Much of more import,  it  may seem,  and yet to  me less 

####-pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.' 
     'And earlier, it is to  be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden 
hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind,  
only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous.  Is it naught to you  
that Thjoden has fought a great battle and  that Isengard is overthrown, and 
that I have broken the staff of Saruman?' 
     'It is much to me. But I know already  sufficient of these deeds for my 
own  counsel  against  the menace of the East.' He turned his  dark  eyes on 
Gandalf, and now  Pippin  saw a likeness between  the  two, and he  felt the 
strain between them,  almost as if  he saw a line of smouldering fire, drawn 
from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame. 
     Denethor  looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did, 
more kingly,  beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet  by a sense other than 
sight  Pippin perceived that  Gandalf had  the greater power and the  deeper 
wisdom, and a majesty that  was veiled.  And he was  older, far older.  'How 
much older?' he wondered, and  then  he thought  how odd it was that he  had 
never thought about it before. Treebeard had  said  something about wizards, 
but even  then  he  had  not  thought of Gandalf as  one  of them. What  was 
Gandalf? In what  far  time and place did he come  into  the world, and when 
would he leave it? And  then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor  
and Gandalf  still looked each other in the eye, as if  reading the  other's 
mind. But it was Denethor who first withdrew his gaze. 
     'Yea,' he  said; 'for though  the Stones  be lost, they say,  still the 
lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come 
to 
them. But sit now!' 
     Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver  
with  a  silver flagon  and cups,  and  white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he 
could  not  take his eyes  from  the  old lord.  Was it so, or  had  he only 
imagined it, that  as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam  of his  eye had 
glanced upon Pippin's face?  
     'Now tell  me your tale,  my  liege,' said Denethor, half  kindly; half 
mockingly. 'For the words  of one whom my son so befriended will be  
welcome 
indeed.' 
     Pippin never forgot that hour in the great  hall under the piercing eye 
of the Lord of  Gondor,  stabbed ever and anon by his  shrewd questions, and 

####-all the while conscious of  Gandalf at his side, watching and listening, and 
(so Pippin felt) holding  in check a rising  wrath and impatience.  When the 
hour was  over and Denethor again rang  the gong, Pippin felt worn out.  'It 
cannot  be  more  than  nine o'clock,'  he thought.  'I  could now eat three 
breakfasts on end.' 
     'Lead  the  Lord  Mithrandir  to  the housing prepared for  him,'  said 
Denethor, 'and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he will.  
But  be it known that  I have  now sworn him to  my service, and he shall be 
known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass-words. Send word 
to the Captains that they shall wait on me here, as soon as may be after the 
third hour has rung. 
     'And  you,  my Lord  Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when  you will. 
None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours 
of sleep. Let your wrath at an old man's folly run off and then return to my 
comfort!' 
     'Folly?'  said  Gandalf. 'Nay,  my lord, when you are a dotard you will 
die. You can  use  even your grief as  a cloak.  Do you  think that I do not 
understand your purpose in  questioning for an hour one who knows the least, 
while I sit by?' 
     'If you understand  it,  then  be  content,' returned  Denethor. 'Pride 
would  be  folly that disdained help and counsel  at need; but you deal  out 
such gifts according to your own designs. Yet  the Lord of Gondor  is not to  
be made the tool  of other men's purposes, however worthy. And to  him there 
is no purpose higher  in the world as it now stands than the good of Gondor;  
and the rule  of Gondor, my lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king  
should come again.' 
     'Unless  the  king  should  come  again?' said Gandalf. 'Well,  my lord 
Steward,  it is  your task  to keep some  kingdom still against  that event, 
which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all  the aid that you  
are pleased to ask for.  But  I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, 
neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small.  But all worthy things that 
are in peril as the world now stands,  those are my care. And for my part, I 
shall  not wholly  fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything 
passes through this night that  can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower  
again in days to come. For I also am a steward.  Did you not know?' And with 
that he turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at his side. 
     Gandalf  did not  look  at Pippin or  speak a word to him as they went. 

####-Their  guide brought them from  the doors  of  the hall, and  then  led them 
across  the  Court  of the  Fountain into a lane  between  tall buildings of 
stone. After  several turns  they came to a house close to the wall  of  the 
citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the  hill 
with  the mountain. Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide 
carven  stair,  he showed  them to a fair room, light  and airy, with goodly  
hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured. It  was sparely furnished, having but 
a  small table,  two chairs and a  bench;  but  at  either side  ther e  were 
curtained alcoves  and  well -clad beds  within with  vessels  and basins for  
washing. There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over 
the 
great  curve of  Anduin, still shrouded in  mists, towards the Emyn Muil and 
Rauros  far away.  Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep 
stone sill. 
     'Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he  said, as their guide went out and 
closed the door. 'I did the best I could.' 
     'You did  indeed!' said Gandalf,  laughing suddenly; and  he  came  and 
stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing 
out  of the window.  Pippin glanced in  some  wonder  at the face now  close 
beside his own, for the  sound of that laugh had been gay and merry.  Yet in  
the wizard's  face he saw  at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as 
he looked more intently he perceived that under all there was a great joy: a  
fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth. 
     'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be 
long  before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such 
terrible old  men.  Still the Lord of Gondor  learned more from you than you  
may have  guessed, Pippin. You  could not hide the fact that Bor omir did not 
lead the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high 
honour 
who was coming  to Minas Tirith;  and that  he had a famous sword. Men think  
much about the stories of  old  days in Gondor;  and Denethor has given long 
thought  to the rhyme and to  the words  Isildur's  Bane, since Boromir went 
away. 
     'He  is not as other  men  of  this  time,  Pippin, and whatever be his 
descent  from  father  to son, by some chance the blood  of Westernesse runs 
nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet did not in 
Boromir whom he  loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends 

####-his will thither, much of what is passing in the minds of men, even of those 
that dwell far off. It is difficult to deceive him, and dangerous to try. 
     'Remember that! For you  are  now  sworn to his  service. I do not know 
what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was well done. 
I  did not hinder  it,  for  generous deed should  not  be  checked  by cold 
counsel.  It  touched  his  heart,  as  well (may I  say it) as pleasing his 
humour. And at least you are free  now  to move  about as  you will in Minas 
Tirith - when you are not on  duty. For there is another side to it. You are 
at his command; and he will not  forget. Be wary still!' 
     He fell silent and sighed. 'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may 
bring. For  one thing, tomorrow will  be certain to bring  worse than today, 
for many days  to  come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it. 
The board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire 
to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor.  I do not think  that he is in 
the City; but I have had no  time to gather news. I must go.  Pippin. I must  
go to this lords' council and learn what I  can. But the Enemy has the move, 
and he is about to open his full game.  And pawns are likely to see  as much  
of it  as  any,  Peregrin son of Paladin,  soldier  of  Gondor. Sharpen your 
blade!' 
     Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. 'I  am in haste Pippin,' 
he said. 'Do  me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you  are 
not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how  he is housed. These 
people 
are kindly to beasts, for they are a good  and wise folk, but they have less 
skill with horses than some.' 
     With that Gandalf went out;  and as he did so, there came the note of a  
clear sweet bell ringing in  a tower of  the citadel. Three strokes it rang, 
like silver in  the  air, and ceased: the third hour from the rising of  the 
sun. 
     After a minute Pippin went to  the door and  down the stair  and looked 
about the street. The sun was now  shining warm and bright,  and the  towers 
and tall houses cast long  clear-cut shadows westward.  High in the blue air 
Mount Mindolluin lifted its  white helm and snowy cloak.  Armed men  went to 
and fro in the ways of  the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to 
changes of post and duty. 
     'Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire,' said Pippin aloud to himself.  
'Just  the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring  sunshine. 

####-And  how I  should like  breakfast! Do these  people ever  have it, or is it 
over? And when do they have dinner, and where?' 
     Presently he noticed a man, clad  in  black and white, coming along the 
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely 
and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but he had no need. The man 
came straight up to him. 
     'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been 
sworn to the  service of the  Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his 
hand and Pippin took it. 
     'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I  
have been sent  to you to teach you the pass-words, and to  tell you some of 
the many things that  no doubt you  will  wish to know. And  for my part,  I 
would learn of you also.  For  never before have  we seen a halfling in this 
land and though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in  any 
tale that we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir.  Do you know him 
well?' 
     'Well,' said Pippin.  'I  have known of  him all my short  life, as you  
might say; and lately  I have travelled far with him. But there  is  much to 
read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more  than a page or two.  
Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of 
our Company, I think, who really knew him.' 
     'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?' 
     'Oh,' stammered  Pippin, 'he was a  man who went  about with us. I think  
he is in Rohan now.' 
     'You have  been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of 
that land also;  for we put much of what little hope we have  in its people. 
But I am forgetting my errand, which was first to answer what you would ask. 
What would you know, Master Peregrin?' 
     'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to  say so, rather  a burning 
question  in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that?  
I mean, what  are  the  meal-times, if you  understand me, and where is  the 
dining-room, if there is one?  And the inns? I looked, but never a one could 
I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught  of 
ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.' 
     Beregond looked at him  gravely. 'An old campaigner,  I see,'  he said. 
'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next  hope of food 
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not  yet 

####-eaten today?' 
     'Well, yes,  to speak in courtesy, yes,' said Pippin. 'But no more than 
a cup of wine  and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but  he 
racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.' 
     Beregond laughed. 'At the table small men may  do the greater deeds, we 
say. But you  have broken  your fast  as well as any man in the Citadel, and 
with  greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower  of guard and is now in 
posture  of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take  a morsel in the grey  light, 
and go  to our duties  at  the opening hour. But do not despair!' He laughed 
again,  seeing the  dismay in Pippin's  face. 'Those who have had heavy duty 
take somewhat  to refresh  their strength  in the mid-morning. Then there is 
the  nuncheon,  at noon or  after as  duties allow; and men  gather for  the 
daymeal, and such mirth as there still may be, about the hour of sunset. 
     'Come! We will walk a little and then go find us  some refreshment, and 
eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.' 
     'One moment!' said Pippin blushing. 'Greed, or hunger by your courtesy,  
put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call  him, asked me to 
see to his horse  - Shadowfax,  a  great steed of Rohan, and the apple of the 
king's  eye, I  am told, though he  has  given  him  to  Mithrandir  for his 
services. I think his new master loves the beast  better than  he loves many 
men, and if his  good  will is  of  any value to this  city,  you will treat 
Shadowfax with all honour: with greater  kindness than you have treated this 
hobbit, if it is possible.' 
     'Hobbit?' said Beregond. 
     'That is what we call ourselves,' said Pippin. 
     'I am glad to learn it,' said Beregond, 'for now I may say that strange 
accents  do not   mar fair speech,  and hobbits are  a  fair-spoken folk. But 
come! You shall make me acquainted with this good  horse. I love beasts, and 
we  see  them  seldom  in this  stony city;  for my  people  came  from  the 
mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall 
be short, a mere call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.' 
     Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the 
sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables 
where  a   few  swift  horses  were  kept,  hard  by  the  lodgings  of  the 
errand-riders of  the  Lord: messengers always ready  to  go at  the  urgent 
command of Denethor or his  chief  captains. But  now all the horses and the  
riders were out and away. 

####-     Shadowfax  whinnied as Pippin  entered the stable and  turned his head. 
'Good morning!'  said Pippin.  'Gandalf will come  as soon as  he may. He is 
busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and 
you resting, I hope, after your long labours.' 
     Shadowfax  tossed  his  head  and  stamped. But he allowed  Beregond to 
handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks. 
     'He looks  as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a  
great journey,' said Beregond. 'How  strong and proud  he is!  Where  is his 
harness? It should be rich and fair.' 
     'None is  rich  and fair  enough for him,' said Pippin.  'He will  have 
none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no 
bit, bridle,  whip,  or  thong  will  tame  him.  Farewell, Shadowfax!  Have 
patience. Battle is coming.' 
     Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and 
they covered their ears.  Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger  
was well filled. 
     'And now for our  manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the 
citadel, and so  to a door in the north side of the great tower. There  they 
went  down a  long  cool stair into a  wide alley lit with lamps. There were 
hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open. 
     'This  is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the  Guard.' said 
Beregond.  'Greetings,  Targon!' he called through the hatch.  'It  is early 
yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has 
ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning, 
and he is hungry. Give us what you have!' 
     They got there bread, and butter, and cheese  and  apples:  the last of 
the  winter store,  wrinkled but  sound and sweet;  and a leather flagon  of 
new-drawn ale, and  wooden platters  and cups. They put  all into  a  wicker  
basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place 
at  the  east  end of  the  great out-thrust battlement where  there was  an 
embrasure in  the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there  they 
could look out on the morning over the world. 
     They  ate  and drank; and they  talked now of  Gondor and its  ways and 
customs, now  of the Shire and the strange countries that  Pippin  had seen. 
And ever as they talked Beregond  was more amazed,  and looked with  greater  
wonder  at the  hobbit, swinging his short  legs as he sat  on the seat,  or  
standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below. 

####-     'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us 
you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet  
you have endured  perils  and seen marvels that few of our  greybeards could 
boast of. I thought  it was the whim of  our Lord to take him  a noble page, 
after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so, 
and you must pardon my foolishness.' 
     'I do,' said Pippin. 'Though you are  not far  wrong. I am still little 
more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years 
yet  before I "come of age", as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about 
me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.' 
     The  sun was now  climbing, and the  mists in the  vale below  had been 
drawn up. The last of them  were  floating away, just  overhead, as wisps of 
white cloud borne  on  the  stiffening breeze from  the East,  that  was now 
flapping and tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel. Away down 
in the valley-bottom, five leagues or  so as  the eye leaps, the Great River  
could now  be seen grey  and glittering, coming  out of the  north-west, and 
bending in a mighty sweep south and west again, till it was lost to  view in 
a haze and shimmer, far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away. 
     Pippin could see all the  Pelennor laid out before him, dotted into the 
distance with farmsteads  and little  walls, barns  and  byres, but  nowhere 
could he see any kine  or other  beasts.  Many  roads and tracks crossed the 
green fields,  and there  was much coming and going: wains moving  in  lines 
towards the Great Gate, and  others passing  out.  Now and again  a horseman 
would ride up, and leap from  the saddle  and hasten into the City. But most  
of the traffic went out along the chief highway,  and that turned south, and 
then  bending  swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from 
sight.  It was wide  and well-paved, and along its eastern  edge ran a broad 
green riding-track, and beyond that a wall . On the ride horsemen galloped to  
and  fro, but all the  street seemed to be  choked with great  covered wains 
going  south.  But  soon Pippin  saw that  all was in fact well-ordered: the 
wains were  moving in  three  lines,  one swifter  drawn  by horses; another  
slower, great waggons with fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and 
along the west rim of the road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men. 
     'That is the  road  to the  vales of  Tumladen and  Lossarnach, and the 
mountain-villages,  and then on  to Lebennin,' said  Beregond. 'There  go the 
last  of  the  wains that bear away to refuge the aged the children, and the 
women that must go  with them.  They must all  be gone from the Gate and the 

####-road  clear for a league  before  noon: tha t was the  order.  It  is  a  sad 
necessity.'  He sighed. 'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet  again.  
And there  were  always too few children  in  this  city; but now there  are 
none-save some young lads  that will not depart,  and may  find some task to 
do: my own son is one of them.' 
     They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at 
any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields. 'What can 
I see there?' he asked, pointing down to the  middle of the great  curve  of 
the Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?' 
     'It was  a city,'  said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor,  of  which 
this  was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath  on either side 
of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in 
the  days of  the youth  of Denethor: not to dwell in,  but  to  hold as  an 
outpost, and  to rebuild  the  bridge for the  passage of our arms. And then 
came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.' 
     'The Black R iders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes,  and they  were wide 
and dark with an old fear re-awakened. 
     'Yes,  they  were  black,' said  Beregond,  'and  I  see  that you know 
something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.' 
     'I know of them,' said  Pippin softly,  'but I will not  speak of  them 
now, so near, so near.' He  broke  off  and lifted his eyes above the River, 
and  it  seemed to  him that  all  he could  see was  a vast and threatening 
shadow. Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged 
edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a  
cloud-wall, and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But  even as he looked 
it seemed to his eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly, 
slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun. 
     'So  near to Mordor?' said  Beregond quietly.  'Yes,  there it lies. We 
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it 
seems fainter and more distant;  sometimes nearer and darker. It  is growing 
and  darkening now; and  therefore  our fear  and disquiet grow too. And the 
Fell Riders, less  than a year ago they won back the crossings, and  many of 
our best men were  slain.  Boromir it  was that drove  the enemy at last back  
from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a  
little  while. But  we  await  now  a new onslaught there.  Maybe the  chief 
onslaught of the war that comes.' 
     'When?' said Pippin. 'Have  you a  guess?  For I saw the  beacons  last 

####-night and  the errand-riders; and  Gandalf said that it was a sign that  war 
had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to  have 
slowed up again.' 
     'Only because  everything is now ready,' said Beregond. 'It  is but the 
deep breath before the plunge.' 
     'But why were the beacons lit last night?' 
     'It is  over-late  to  send  for aid  when you  are  already besieged,' 
answered Beregond. 'But I  do  not  know the  counsel of  the  Lord  and his 
captains. They have many ways of gathering news.  And  the Lord Denethor  is 
unlike  other men: he sees far. Some  say that as he sits alone in his  high 
chamber  in the Tower at night, and bends his thought  this way and that, he  
can read somewhat of the future; and that he  will  at times search even the 
mind of the  Enemy, wrestling  with  him. And so it  is that he is old, worn 
before his  time. But however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond 
the River on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings.  
     'But if you would know what I think set  the beacons ablaze, it was the 
news  that came yestereve  out of Lebennin. There is a great  fleet  drawing 
near to the mouths of Anduin, manned by  the corsairs of Umbar in the South. 
They have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor, and they have allied them 
with the Enemy, and now  make  a heavy stroke in  his cause. For this attack  
will draw off much of the help  that  we looked  to  have  from Lebennin and  
Belfalas, where folk are hardy a nd numerous. All the more do our thoughts go 
north to Rohan; and the more glad are we for these tidings  of  victory that 
you bring. 
     'And yet'  - he paused and stood up, and looked round, north,  east, and 
south - 'the doings at Isengard  should warn us that we are  caught now in a  
great net and strategy. This is no longer a  bickering at the fords, raiding 
from Ithilien and from Anurien, ambushing and pillaging. This is a great war 
long-planned, and we are but one piece in it, whatever pride may say. Things 
move  in the  far  East beyond the  Inland Sea, it is reported; and north in 
Mirkwood and beyond; and south in Harad. And now all  realms shall be put to 
the test, to stand, or fall  - under the Shadow. 
     'Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour:  ever we bear  the brunt of 
the  chief  hatred  of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down out of  the 
depths of  time and over the deeps  of the Sea. Here will the  hammer -stroke 
fall hardest. And for that reason Mithrandir came  hither in such haste. For 
if we fall, who shall stand? And, Master  Peregrin, do you see any hope that 

####-we shall stand?' 
     Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and 
brave banners, and  the sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom 
in the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of  the orcs 
in  the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard,  the birds of evil 
eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire - and of the winged 
terror,  the Nazgyl. He  shuddered, and hope seemed  to wither. And even  at 
that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark 
wing had  passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high 
and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold. 
He blanched and cowered against the wall. 
     'What was that?' asked Beregond. 'You also felt something?' 
     'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the  sign of our fall, and the shadow of 
doom, a Fell Rider of the air.' 
     'Yes, the  shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear  that  Minas  Tirith 
shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.' 
     For a time they  sat together with bowed heads and did  not speak. Then 
suddenly Pippin looked up and  saw  that  the  sun was still shining and the 
banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook  himself. 'It is passed,' he 
said. 'No, my  heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and 
is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still  upon 
our knees.' 
     'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and  fro.  'Nay, 
though all things  must come  utterly to an  end  in  time, Gondor shall not 
perish yet. Not though  the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build 
a hill of carrion before them. There  are still other fastnesses, and secret 
ways of escape  into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some 
hidden valley where the grass is green.' 
     'All the same, I  wish it was over for good or ill.' said Pippin. 'I am 
no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on the edge 
of one  that  I  can't escape  is  worst  of all.  What a long  day it seems 
already! I should  be happier, if we  were not obliged  to stand and  watch, 
making  no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in 
Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.' 
     'Ah, there  you  lay  your finger on  the  sore  that  many feel!' said 
Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold 
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can 

####-be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a man 
of hardihood  and swift  judgement in the field. But such is  Faramir.  Less 
reckless and eager than Boromir, but  not less resolute. Yet what indeed can 
he do? We cannot assault  the mountains of  -  of yonder  realm. Our reach is 
shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand  
must be heavy!' He smote the hilt of his sword. 
     Pippin looked at  him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he 
had yet seen in that land; and  with  a glitter in  his eye as he thought of 
the battle. 'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,' he thought, but 
he  said nothing.  'A  pawn did  Gandalf  say?  Perhaps  but  on  the  wrong 
chessboard.' 
     So they  talked  until the  sun  reached  its height, and suddenly  the 
noon-bells were rung, and there was a  stir in the citadel; for all save the 
watchmen were going to their meal. 
     'Will you come with me?' said Beregond. 'You may join my  mess for this 
day. I do not know to  what  company  you will be  assigned; or the Lord may 
hold you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to 
meet as many men as you may, while there is yet time.' 
     'I shall be glad  to come,' said Pippin. 'I am  lonely, to tell you the 
truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had  no one to talk  
to  or jest with. Perhaps  I could  really join your  company?  Are  you the  
captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?' 
     'Nay, nay,' Beregond laughed, 'I am no captain. Neither office nor rank  
nor lordship  have I,  being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of 
the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the  Guard of 
the Tower of Gondor  is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in 
the land.' 
     'Then it is far beyond me,' said Pippin. 'Take me back to our room, and 
if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like  - as your guest. ' 
     Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so  Pippin went  
with Beregond and was made known  to  the  men of the  Third Company. And 
it 
seemed that Beregond got as much honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was 
very welcome.  There  had  already  been  much talk  in  the  citadel  about 
Mithrandir's companion and his  long  closeting with the  Lord;  and  rumour 
declared that a Prince  of the Halflings had  come out of the North to offer  
allegiance to Gondor and five  thousand  swords.  And some said that when the 

####-Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small 
maybe, but doughty. 
     Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this  hopeful  tale,  he could 
not be rid of his new  rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by 
Boromir and honoured by  the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for  
coming 
among them, and  hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him 
as much food and ale as he could  wish. Indeed his  only  trouble was to  be 
'wary' according  to the counsel of Gandalf, and  not to let  his tongue wag 
freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends. 
     At length  Beregond  rose. 'Farewell for  this time!'  he said. 'I have 
duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you  are 
lonely, as you  say, maybe  you would like a  merry guide about the City. My 
son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go 
down to  the  lowest  circle and ask for  the Old  Guesthouse  in  the  Rath 
Celerdain, the Lampwrights' Street. You will find him  there with other lads 
that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the 
Great Gate ere the closing.' 
     He went out, and soon after all the  others followed. The day was st ill 
fine, though  it  was  growing hazy,  and it was  hot for March, even so far 
southwards. Pippin felt sleepy,  but  the  lodging seemed cheerless, and  he 
decided to go down and  explore the City. He took a few morsels that he  had 
saved to Shadowfax,  and  they were  graciously accepted,  though the  horse 
seemed to have no lack. Then he walked on down many winding ways.  
     People  stared  much  as  he  passed. To  his  face  men  were  gravely 
courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands 
upon the breast; but  behind him he heard many calls,  as those out of doors 
cried to others within  to come  and see the Prince  of the  Halflings,  the 
companion of Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common 
Speech, 
but  it  was not long before he  learned at least what was meant by  Ernil i 
Pheriannath  and knew that his title had gone down before him into the City. 
     He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to 
the lowest and widest circle, a nd there  he was directed to the Lampwrights' 
Street, a broad way running towards  the  Great Gate. In it he found the Old 
Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with  two wings running 

####-back from the street, and between them a narrow greensward, behind which 
was 
the many-windowed house, fronted along its whole  width by  a pillared porch 
and  a flight of steps down on  to  the grass.  Boys were playing  among the 
pillars,  the only children  that Pippin had  seen  in Minas Tirith,  and he 
stopped to look at them. Presently one of them caught sight of him, and with 
a  shout  he sprang across  the grass and  came into the street, followed by 
several others. There he stood in front of Pippin, looking him up and down. 
     'Greetings!' said  the la d. 'Where do you come from? You are a stranger  
in the City.' 
     'I was,' said Pippin; 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.' 
     'Oh  come!' said the lad. 'Then we are all men  here.  But how old  are 
you, and what is your name? I am ten  years a lready, and  shall soon be five 
feet.  I am  taller  than you. But then my father  is  a  Guard, one of  the 
tallest. What is your father?' 
     'Which question  shall  I  answer first?' said Pippin. 'My father farms 
the  lands  round Whitwell  near  Tuckborough in  the  Shire.  I  am  nearly 
twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and  not likely 
to grow any more, save sideways.' 
     'Twenty-nine!' said the lad  and whistled. 'Why, you are  quite old! As 
old as my  uncle Iorlas. Still,' he added hopefully, 'I  wager I could stand 
you on your head or lay you on your back.' 
     'Maybe you could, if I let you,' said Pippin with a laugh. 'And maybe I 
could  do  the  same  to  you: we know some  wrestling tricks in  my  little 
country.  Where,  let  me tell  you,  I am considered  uncommonly large  and 
strong; and I have never allowed anyone  to stand me  on  my  head. So if it 
came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have  to kill you. For  
when you  are older, you will learn that folk are not always what they seem;  
and though  you may have taken me for a soft stranger -lad and easy prey, let  
me  warn you: I am not,  I  am a halfling,  hard, bold,  and wicked!' Pippin 
pulled such  a  grim face  that the boy stepped  back a pace, but at once he 
returned with clenched fists and the light of battle in his eye. 
     'No!'  Pippin laughed. 'Don't  believe what strangers say of themselves 
either! I am  not a fighter.  But it  would be politer in any  case for  the 
challenger to say who he is.' 
     The boy drew himself  up  proudly.  'I am Bergil son of Beregond of the 
Guards,' he said. 

####-     'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him 
and he sent me to find you.' 
     'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look  
of dismay came over his face. 'Do not  tell me that he has changed his mind,  
and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.' 
     'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says 
that if you would  prefer it to standing me  on  my head, you might show  me 
round the  City for  a while  and cheer my loneliness. I can  tell  you some 
tales of far countries in return.' 
     Bergil  clapped his hands,  and laughed with relief.  'All is well,' he 
cried. 'Come then! We were  soon going to the  Gate  to look  on. We will go 
now.' 
     'What is happening there?' 
     'The  Captains  of the  Outlands  are  expected up the South  Road  ere 
sundown. Come with us and you will see.' 
     Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had  since he 
parted from Merry, and soon they  were laughing and  talking  gaily  as they 
went about  the streets, heedless of the many  glances  that men gave  them. 
Before long they found themselves in  a throng going towards the Great Gate. 
There Pippin went  up  much in  the esteem of Bergil,  for when he spoke his 
name and the pass-word the guard saluted  him and let  him pass through; and 
what was more, he allowed him to take his companion with him. 
     'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the 
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.' 
     Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men  along  the  verge of the road 
and of the great paved space into  which all the wa ys to  Minas Tirith  ran. 
All eyes were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away 
there! They are coming!' 
     Pippin and Bergil  edged their way  forward to the front of the  crowd, 
and waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheering rolled 
towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and 
all about them people were shouting. 
     'Forlong! Forlong!' Pippin  heard men calling.  'What do  they say?' he 
asked. 
     'Forlong  has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of 
Lossarnach. That is where  my grandsire  lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old 
Forlong!' 

####-     Leading the line there came walking a big thick -limbed horse, and on it 
sat a man of  wide  shoulders and  huge girth, but old and grey-bearded, yet 
mail-clad and  black-helmed and  bearing  a  long heavy  spear.  Behind  him 
marched  proudly  a  dusty  line  of  men,   well-armed  and  bearing  great 
battle-axes; grim-faced they were, and shorter  and  somewhat swarthier  than 
any men that Pippin had yet seen in Gondor. 
     'Forlong!' men shouted.  'True heart, true friend!  Forlong!'  But when 
the men of Lossarnach  had passed they muttered: 'So few! Two hundreds, 
what 
are they? We hoped for ten times the number. That will be the new tidings of 
the  black fleet.  They  are sparing only a tithe  of  their strength. Still 
every little is a gain.' 
     And  so  the  companies  came and  were hailed and  cheered  and passed 
through  the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor  
in a dark hour; but always too few, always less than hope looked for or need 
asked. The  men of  Ringlu  Vale  behind the  son  of  their  lord, Dervorin 
striding  on foot: three hundreds. From  the uplands of  Morthond, the great 
Blackroot Vale,  tall Duinhir with  his sons, Duilin and  Derufin,  and five 
hundred bowmen. From the  Anfalas, the Langstrand far away,  a  long line of 
men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little villages, scantily 
equipped  save for the hou sehold of Golasgil their lord. From Lamedon, a few 
grim hillmen without a  captain.  Fisher -folk of the Ethir, some hundred  or  
more spared from the ships. Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath 
Gelin with three hundreds  of gallant green-clad men. And last and proudest,  
Imrahil,  Prince  of Dol Amroth,  kinsman of the  Lord, with  gilded banners 
bearing his token of the Ship and  the Silver Swan, and a company of knights 
in full harness riding grey horses; and behind them seven hundreds of men at 
arms, tall as lords, grey-eyed, dark-haired, singing as they came. 
     And  that was  all, less than  three thousands full told. No more would 
come. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into  the City and died 
away. The onlookers stood silent for a while. Dust hung  in the air, for the 
wind had  died and  the  evening  was heavy. Already  the  closing  hour was 
drawing nigh, and the red sun had gone behind  Mindolluin. Shadow  came 
down 
on the City. 
     Pippin  looked  up,  and  it  seemed to  him that  the  sky  had  grown 
ashen-grey, as  if a vast dust  and  smoke hung above  them, and  light came 

####-dully  through it. But in the West  the dying  sun had  set all  the fume on 
fire, and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked  with 
embers. 'So ends a  fair day in wrath!' he said forgetful of the lad  at his 
side. 
     'So it  will, if  I  have not returned before the sundown-bells,'  said 
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.' 
     Hand  in hand they went  back into the City, the last to  pass the Gate 
before it  was  shut;  and as they  reached the Lampwrights'  Street all the 
bells in the towers tolled solemnly. Lights sprang in many windows, and from 
the houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound 
of song. 
     'Farewell  for  this  time,'  said  Bergil.  'Take  my  greetings to my 
:father, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg.  
Almost  I wish now that there was no war,  for we might have  had some merry 
times. We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is 
good to be  there in Spring, the  woods and fields are  full of flowers. But 
maybe we will go thither together  yet.  They will never overcome our  Lord, 
and my father is very valiant. Farewell and return!' 
     They  parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel.  It seemed  a  
long way, and he  grew hot and  very hungry; and night closed down swift and 
dark.  Not a star pricked the sky. He  was late for the daymeal in the mess, 
and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his 
son.  After the  meal Pippin stayed a while,  and then took his leave, for a  
strange gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf 
again. 
     'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at  the door of the  small hall, 
on the north side of the citadel, where  they had sat. 'It is a black night, 
and all the blacker  since  orders came that lights are  to be dimmed within 
the City, and none are to shine out from  the walls. And I can give you news 
of another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor  early tomorrow.  
I  fear you will not  be for the Third  Company. Still we may  hope  to meet 
again. Farewell and sleep in peace!' 
     The lodging was   dark,  save  for a  little lantern  set  on the table. 
Gandalf was  not there.  Gloom settled  still  more  heavily  on Pippin.  He 
climbed on the bench  and tried  to  peer out of a window,  but it was  like 
looking  into a pool of ink. He  got down and closed the shutter and went to 
bed.  For a  while he lay and listened for  sounds  of Gandalf's return, and 

####-then he fell into an uneasy sleep. 
     In  the  night he was wakened by  a light, and he saw that  Gandalf had 
come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove. 
There were candles on the  table and rolls of parchment. He heard the wizard 
sigh, and mutter: 'When will Faramir return?' 
     'Hullo!' said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. 'I thought you  
had forgotten  all about me. I am  glad  to see you back. It has been a long 
day.' 
     'But the night  will be too  short,' said  Gandalf.  'I have  come back  
here, for I  must have a  little peace,  alone. You should sleep,  in  a bed 
while you still  may. At the sunrise I  shall take you to the  Lord Denethor  
again. No, when the  summons  comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun. 
There will be no dawn.' 
 
