 

 
 
     Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the  Pelennor.  
The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anurien, but harried 
and scattered by the Rohirrim they had  broken and fled with little fighting 
towards Cair  Andros;  and with  that  threat  destroyed  and  new  strength 
arriving out of the South the City  was as well  manned  as might be. Scouts 
reported  that  no  enemies remained  upon the  roads  east  as  far  as the 
Cross-roads of the Fallen King. All now was ready for the last throw.  
     Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn 
and Gandalf, who went in the  van with the D®nedain  and the sons of Elrond. 
But Merry to his shame was not to go with them. 
     'You are  not fit for  such a  journey,' said  Aragorn. 'But  do not be 
ashamed.  If  you do no  more  in  this  war, you have already earned  great 
honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and do not grudge him 
his chance of peril, for  though  he has done as well as his fortune allowed 
him, he has yet to match your deed. But in truth all now are in like danger. 
Though it may be our part to  find bitter end before the  Gate of Mordor, if 
we do so,  then you will come also to a last  stand, either here or wherever  
the black tide overtakes you. Farewell!' 
     And  so  despondently Merry now  stood and watched the mustering of the 
army. Bergil was with him, and  he  also was downcast; for his father was to 
march leading a company of the  Men  of the City:  he could not  rejoin  the 
Guard until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was also to go, 
as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright 
figure among the tall men of Minas Tirith. 
     At last the  trumpets  rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop, 
and company by company,  they wheeled and went off  eastward. And long 
after 
they had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway, Merry 
stood there. The  last glint of the morning sun  on  spear and helm twinkled 
and was lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling 
friendless  and  alone. Everyone  that  he cared for had  gone away into the 
gloom  that  hung over the distant eastern sky;  and little  hope at all was 
left in his heart that he wou ld ever see any of them again. 

####-     As if recalled by his mood of despair,  the  pain in his arm  returned, 
and he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was roused by the 
touch of Bergil's hand. 
     'Come, Master Perian!' said the lad. 'You are still  in pain, I see.  I 
will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come back. The 
Men  of  Minas Tirith  will never be overcome. And  now they  have the  Lord 
Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.' 
     Ere  noon the army  came  to  Osgiliath.  There  all  the  workers  and 
craftsmen  that  could  be  spared were  busy. Some were  strengthening  the 
ferries and boat-bridges that the  enemy had made and in part destroyed when 
they fled; some  gathered  stores and booty; and others  on the eastern side 
across the River were throwing up hasty works of defence. 
     The vanguard passed on through the ruins  of  Old Gondor, and  over the 
wide River, and  on up the long straight road that in the high days had been 
made to run  from the fair  Tower of the Sun to the tall  Tower of the Moon,  
which now was Minas Morgul in its accursed vale. Five miles beyond Osgiliath 
they halted, ending their first day's march. 
     But  the  horsemen  pressed  on  and  ere  evening  they  came  to  the 
Cross-roads and the great ring of trees, and all was silent. No sign of  any 
enemy  had they seen, no cry or  call had been heard, no shaft had sped from 
rock or  thicket by the  way, yet  ever as they went  forward  they felt the 
watchfulness  of  the land  increase. Tree and stone,  blade  and leaf  were 
listening. The darkness had been dispelled, and far away westward sunset was 
on the  Vale of  Anduin, and the white peaks of the mountains blushed in the  
blue air; but a shadow and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel D®ath. 
     Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the 
ring  of trees,  and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds cried aloud: 
'The Lords  of Gondor have returned  and all this  land  that is theirs they 
take back.'  The  hideous orc-head that  was  set upon the carven figure was 
cast down and  broken in pieces, and the old king's head was raised  and set 
in its place once more, still crowned with white and golden flowers: and men 
laboured  to wash and pare away all the foul scrawls that orcs  had put upon  
the stone. 
     Now in their debate  some had counselled that Minas Morgul should first  
be assailed, and if  they  might take  it,  it should  be utterly destroyed. 
'And, maybe,'  said Imrahil, 'the road that leads thence to  the pass  above 
will prove  an easier way of  assault upon the Dark Lord  than  his northern 

####-gate.' 
     But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of  the evil that 
dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and 
horror, and because also of the  news  that Faramir had brought.  For if the 
Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that  way,  then above  all they should not 
draw the Eye of Mordor thither.  So the next day when the main host came up, 
they set a strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor  
should send a force  over the Morgul Pass, or should bring  more men up from 
the South. For that guard  they chose mostly archers  who knew  the ways  of 
Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting  of the 
ways. But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the  vanguard  to  the  entrance  of 
Morgul Vale and looked on the evil city. 
     It was dark and  lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of  Mordor  
that  had  dwelt  there had been destroyed in  battle,  and the  Nazgyl were 
abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy  with fear and enmity. Then they 
broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed. 
     The  day  after, being the  third day  since they  set  out  from Minas 
Tirith, the army  began its  northward  march along  the  road.  It was some 
hundred  miles by that  way  from the  Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what 
might befall  them before they  came so  far  none knew They went openly but 
heedfully, with mounted scouts before them  on the road, and others on  foot 
upon either  side, especially  on  the  eastward flank;  for there lay  dark 
thickets, and  a tumbled  land of rocky ghylls  and crags,  behind which the 
long  grim slopes of the Ephel D®ath clambered up. The weather of  the world 
remained fair and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the 
glooms  and the sad  mists  that clung  about  the Mountains of  Shadow; and 
behind them at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in the upper winds.  
     Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry:  
"The  Lords of Gondor are come! Let  all leave this land  or yield them up!' 
But Imrahil said: 'Say not  The Lords of Gondor.  Say The King Elessar.  For 
that is true, even though he has  not yet  sat  upon the throne; and it will 
give the Enemy more thought, if  the  heralds use that name.' And thereafter  
thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none 
answered the challenge. 
     Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming  peace,  the hearts  of all 
the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile 
that they went  north foreboding  of evil grew heavier  on them. It was near 

####-the  end of the second day of their  march  from  the Cross-roads  that they 
first met any offer  of battle.  For a strong force  of Orcs and Easterlings 
attempted to  take their leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the 
very place where Faramir  had waylaid the men of Harad, and the road went in 
a deep cutting through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But the Captains 
of the West were well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth 
Annyn 
led by Mablung; and so the ambush was itself trapped. For horsemen went 
wide 
about westward and  came  up on the flank of  the enemy and from behind, and 
they were destroyed or driven east into the hills. 
     But  the victory did  little to  enhearten the captains.  'It  is but a  
feint,' said Aragorn; 'and its chief purpose, I  deem, was  rather to draw us 
on by a false guess of our Enemy's weakness than to  do us much hurt,  yet.' 
And from that evening onward the Nazgyl came and followed every move  of 
the 
army. They still  flew  high and out  of sight of all  save Legolas, and  yet 
their presence could  be felt, as a deepening of shadow and a dimming of the  
sun; and though the Ringwraiths did not  yet stoop low upon  their foes  and  
were silent, uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off. 
     So time and  the hopeless  journey wore away. Upon the fourth day  from  
the Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last to the end 
of  the living lands,  and began to pass into the desolation that lay before 
the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and  they could  descry the  marshes 
and the desert that  stretched north and west to  the Emyn Muil. So desolate 
were those places and so  deep  the horror that lay on them that some of the 
host were unmanned, and they could neither walk nor ride further north. 
     Aragorn looked  at them,  and there was pity  in his  eyes  rather than 
wrath;  for  these were young men from Rohan,  from Westfold  far  away,  or  
husbandmen  from  Lossarnach, and to them Mordor had been  from childhood  
a 
name  of evil,  and yet  unreal, a  legend that had no part in  their simple 
life; and now  they walked like men in a  hideous dream made true,  and they 
understood not this war nor why fate should lead them to such a pass.  
     'Go!' said Aragorn. 'But  keep what honour you may, and do not run! And 
there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed. Take your 
way  south-west till you come to Cair Andros, and  if that is still  held by  

####-enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the last in 
defence of Gondor and Rohan!' 
     Then some being shamed by  his mercy  overcame their fear and  went on, 
and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful  deed within their measure 
that  they  could turn to, and they  departed.  And so,  since many men  had 
already  been left  at the Cross-roads,  it was with less than six thousands 
that the Captains of the West came at last  to challenge the  Black Gate and 
the might of Mordor. 
     They advanced  now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their 
challenge, and they drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out 
scouts or small parties from the main host. At nightfall of the fifth day of 
the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires about it  
of such dead wood and  heath as they  could find. They  passed the hours  of 
night  in  wakefulness  and they were aware  of many things  half-seen  that 
walked and prowled all about them, and they heard the howling of wolves. The 
wind had  died  and all  the air  seemed still. They  could see  little, for  
though it was cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights  old, there were 
smokes  and  fumes  that rose  out of the earth and  the white  crescent was 
shrouded in the mists of Mordor. 
     It grew cold. As morning came the wind bega n to stir again,  but now it 
came from  the North,  and  soon it  freshened to a  rising breeze. All  the 
night-walkers were gone, and the land seemed empty. North amid their 
noisome 
pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken  rock and 
blasted earth,  the vomit of the maggot-folk of Mordor;  but south  and  now 
near loomed the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost, 
and the two Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side. For in their 
last march  the Capta ins had turned away from the old road as it  bent east,  
and avoided the peril of the lurking hills, and so now they were approaching 
the Morannon from the north-west, even as Frodo had done. 
     The two  vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were 
fast closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All was  silent  but 
watchful. They  were come to the last end of their folly, and stood  forlorn 
and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which their 
army could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines 
of great power, and  the Enemy had no more force than would suffice  for the 
manning of  the gate  and wall alone. Yet  they  knew that all the hills and 

####-rocks  about  the Morannon  were filled with hidden  foes, and  the  shadowy 
defile beyond was bored and tunnelled  by teeming broods of evil things. And 
as they stood they saw all the Nazgyl gathered together, hovering  above the 
Towers of the Teeth like vultures; and they knew that they were watched. But 
still the Enemy made no sign. 
     No  choice was left them but to play their part  to  its end. Therefore 
Aragorn now set the host in such array as could  best be contrived; and they  
were drawn up on two great  hills of blasted stone and earth  that orcs  had 
piled in years of labour. Before them towards Mordor lay like a moat a great 
mire  of  reeking  mud and foul-smelling  pools. When all  was  ordered, the 
Captains rode  forth towards the Black Gate with  a great  guard of horsemen 
and  the  banner and heralds  and  trumpeters.  There  was Gandalf as  chief 
herald,  and  Aragorn  with  the sons of Elrond,  and  Jomer  of Rohan,  and 
Imrahil; and Legolas and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to  go also, so that 
all the enemies of Mordor should have a witness. 
     They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew 
upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent their voices up over  
the battlement of Mordor. 
     'Come forth!'  they cried. 'Let the Lord of the Black   Land come forth!  
Justice shall be done upon  him. For wrongfully he  has made war upon Gondor  
and  wrested its lands. Therefore the King  of Gondor demands that he should 
atone for his evils, and depart then for ever. Come forth!' 
     There was  a long  silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound  was 
heard in  answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans,  and he had a  mind  
first to play these mice cruelly before he struck to kill.  So  it was that, 
even  as  the  Captains were about to  turn  away, the  silence  was  broken 
suddenly.  There came  a  long rolling  of great  drums like thunder in  the 
mountains,  and  then  a  braying  of horns that  shook the very  stones and 
stunned men's ears.  And thereupon the  middle  door  of the Black Gate  was 
thrown open with a great clang, and out of it there came an embassy from the 
Dark Tower. 
     At its  head there rode a  tall  and evil  shape, mounted  upon a black  
horse, if  horse it was;  for it was huge  and hideous,  and its face was  a  
frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head,  and in the sockets of 
its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a flame. The  rider was robed  all 
in  black, and black was his lofty helm;  yet this  was  no Ringwraith but a  
living man. The Lieutenant of the Tower of Barad-dyr he was, and his name is 

####-remembered  in no  tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he said: 'I am 
the Mouth of Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the 
race of those  that are named the Black  N®menureans;  for   they established 
their dwellings in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron's domination, and 
they worshipped him, being enamoured  of evil knowledge.  And he entered the 
service of the  Dark Tower when it  first rose again,  and  because  of  his 
cunning  he grew  ever  higher  in the Lord's favour;  and  he learned  great 
sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and he was more cruel than 
any 
orc. 
     He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company  of 
black-harnessed soldiery, a nd a  single  banner, black but  bearing on it in 
red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the Captains of the West he 
looked them up and down and laughed. 
     'Is  there  anyone in this rout  with authority to treat  with me?'  he 
asked. 'Or indeed with wit to  understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked, 
turning to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to make a king than a piece of 
elvish glass, or a rabble  such as this. Why, any brigand  of the  hills can 
show as good a following!' 
     Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it, 
and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did not stir nor  
move hand to weapon, the other  quailed and  gave back as if menaced with  a  
blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, a nd may not be assailed!' he cried. 
     'Where such  laws hold,'  said  Gandalf, 'it is  also  the  custom  for  
ambassadors to use less insolence. But  no one  has threatened you. You have 
naught to fear  from us,  until your errand is done. But unless  your master  
has  come  to new  wisdom, then with all  his servants  you will be in great 
peril.' 
     'So!' said the  Messenger. 'Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard?  
Have we not  heard of  thee at whiles, and  of thy wanderings, ever hatching 
plots a nd mischief at a safe distance? But this time thou hast stuck out thy 
nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him  who sets 
his foolish webs before  the feet of Sauron the Great. I have  tokens that I 
was bidden  to show to thee -  to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to 
come.' He signed to  one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle 
swathed in black cloths.  
     The Messenger put  these  aside, and there to the wonder and  dismay of 

####-all the Captains he held up first the short sword that Sam had carried,  and 
next a grey  cloak with  an elven-brooch,  and last the coat of mithril-mail 
that  Frodo  had  worn  wrapped  in  his tattered garments. A blackness came  
before their eyes,  and it seemed  to  them in a moment of  silence that the 
world  stood  still,  but their  hearts were dead and their last  hope gone. 
Pippin who stood behind Prince Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.  
     'Silence!' said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back;  but the Messenger  
laughed aloud. 
     'So you  have yet another of these imps  with you!' he cried. 'What use 
you  find in them I cannot guess; but to send them as  spies into Mordor  is 
beyond even your  accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for it is plain that 
this brat  at  least has seen these tokens  before, and it would be vain for 
you to deny them now.' 
     'I do not wish to  deny  them,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed, I know them  all 
and all  their history,  and despite your scorn,  foul Mouth of  Sauron, you  
cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?' 
     'Dwarf-coat,  elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the 
little rat-land  of the Shire-nay; do not  start! We know it well - here are 
the marks  of a  conspiracy. Now,  maybe  he that bore  these  things was  a  
creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe otherwise: one dear to  
you, perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with what little wit is left to you. 
For  Sauron does not love  spies, and what his fate  shall be depends now on 
your choice.' 
     No one answered him;  but he  saw their faces  grey with  fear and  the 
horror  in their eyes, and he laughed again, for it  seemed to him  that his 
sport went well. 'Good, good!' he  said. 'He was dear to you, I see. Or else 
his  errand was one that you did not wish to fail? It  has. And now he shall 
endure the slow torment of years, as long and  slow as our arts in the Great 
Tower can contrive, and never  be released,  unless maybe when he is changed 
and  broken,  so  that  he may come  to you, and you  shall see what you have  
done. This shall surely be-unless you accept my Lord's terms.' 
     'Name  the  terms,'  said Gandalf steadily,  but  those nearby  saw the 
anguish in  his  face,  and now he  seemed an  old and wizened man, crushed, 
defeated at la st. They did not doubt that he would accept. 
     'These are the terms,' said the  Messenger, and smiled as he eyed  them 
one by one. 'The rabble of  Gondor and  its deluded allies shall withdraw at 
once beyond the Anduin, first taking oaths never  again to assail Sauron the 

####-Great  in arms, open or  secret. All lands east of Anduin  shall be Sauron's 
for  ever, solely. West of the Anduin as  far as the Misty Mountains and the 
Gap of Rohan  shall  be tributary to  Mordor,  and men  there  shall bear no 
weapons, but shall  have leave to govern  their own affairs. But  they shall 
help  to rebuild Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall 
be Sauron's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more 
worthy of trust.' 
     Looking in  the Messenger's  eyes they read his thought.  He was to  be  
that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under his sway; he 
would be their tyrant and they his slaves.  
     But Gandalf said:  'This is much  to demand for  the  delivery  of  one 
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight  
many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so 
that  he falls to haggling? And  if indeed we rated this  prisoner  so high, 
what  surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his 
part? Where  is this prisoner?  Let him be brought forth and yielded to  us,  
and then we will consider these demands.' 
     It  seemed then to Gandalf,  intent, watching  him as a  man engaged in 
fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was 
at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again. 
     'Do  not bandy words in  your  insolence with  the Mouth of Sauron!' he 
cried. 'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you  
must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!' 
     'These  we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast  aside  his cloak 
and a white  light shone forth like a sword in that black  place. Before his 
upraised hand   the  foul Messenger recoiled, and  Gandalf  coming seized and 
took from him  the tokens: coat,  cloak, and sword. 'These we  will take  in 
memory of our friend,' he cried.  'But  as for your  terms, we  reject  them 
utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We 
did not  come here  to waste words in treating  with Sauron,  faithless  and 
accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!' 
     Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with 
amazement and anger to the  likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches 
on  its  prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod. Rage filled him 
and his mouth  slavered, and shapeless  sounds of fury came  strangling from 
his throat. But he looked at the fell faces of the Captains and their deadly 
eyes, and fear overcame his wrath. He  gave a great cry, and  turned, leaped 

####-upon his  steed, and with his company galloped madly back to  Cirith Gorgor. 
But  as they went his soldiers blew their horns in signal long arranged; and 
even before they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap. 
     Drums rolled and fires leaped up.  The  great doors  of the  Black Gate 
swung  back wide. Out  of  it streamed a great host  as  swiftly as swirling 
waters when a sluice is lifted. 
     The Captains mounted  again  and rode back, and from the host of Mordor 
there went up a jeering yell. Dust  rose smothering the air,  as from nearby 
there marched up an army of Easterlings  that  had  waited for the signal in 
the shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further Tower.  Down from the hills on 
either side of  the  Morannon poured Orcs innumerable. The men of  the  West  
were  trapped, and soon. all about  the grey mounds where they stood, forces 
ten times and more than ten times  their  match  would ring them in a sea of 
enemies. Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel. 
     Little  time was left to Aragorn for the ordering  of  his battle. Upon 
the one hill he  stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was raised 
the  ba nner of  the  Tree and  Stars.  Upon the other hill hard by stood the 
banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver Swan. And about 
each 
hill a ring was made facing all ways, bristling with spear and sword. But in 
the front  towards Mordor  where the  first bitter  assault would come there 
stood the sons of Elrond on  the left with the D®nedain  about them,  and on 
the right  the  Prince Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair, and 
picked men of the Tower of Guard. 
     The  wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and  arrows whined; but the  sun 
now  climbing  towards  the South was  veiled  in the reeks  of Mordor,  and 
through a threatening haze it  gleamed, remote, a  sullen red, as if it were 
the ending of the day, or the  end maybe of all the world of  light. And out 
of the gathering  mirk the Nazgyl came with. their  cold voices crying words 
of death; and then all hope was quenched. 
     Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when  he  heard Gandalf reject the  
terms and  doom Frodo  to the torment  of  the  Tower;  but  he had mastered  
himself, and now he  stood beside Beregond in the front  rank of Gondor with 
Imrahil's men. For  it seemed best to him to die  soon and  leave the bitter  
story of his life, since all was in ruin. 
     'I wish Merry  was here,' he  heard himself saying, and quick  thoughts 
raced  through his mind, even as he watched  the enemy  come charging to the 

####-assault. 'Well, well, now at  any rate  I understand  poor Denethor a little 
better. We might die together, Merry and  I, and since die we must, why not? 
Well, as he is not  here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do 
my best.' 
     He drew  his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red 
and gold; and  the flowing characters of N®menor glinted like fire upon  the 
blade. 'This was made for just  such an hour,' he thought. 'If only  I could 
smite that foul Messenger with  it, then almost I should draw level with old 
Merry.  Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I 
could see cool sunlight and green grass again!' 
     Then  even  as he thought  these things the  first assault crashed into 
them.  The orcs hindered by the  mires that  lay before the hills halted and 
poured their arrows into the defending ranks.  But through them  there  came 
striding  up,  roaring  like beasts, a  great company of  hill-trolls out of 
Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in 
close-fitting mesh of  horny  scales, or maybe  that was their hideous hide; 
but they bore round  bucklers  huge and black and wielded heavy  hammers  in 
their  knotted hands.  Reckless they sprang into the pools and waded across,  
bellowing as they came. Like a  storm they broke upon the line of the men of 
Gondor, and beat upon helm and head, and arm and shield as smiths hewing the 
hot bending iron. At Pippin's  side Beregond was stunned  and overborne, and 
he fell;  and the great  troll-chief that  smote  him  down  bent over  him, 
reaching out  a  clutching  claw; for  these  fell creatures would bite  the 
throats of those that they threw down. 
     Then  Pippin  stabbed  upwards, and  the  written blade of  Westernesse 
pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his 
black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and came crashing down 
like 
a falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and crushing 
pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness. 
     'So  it ends  as I  guessed  it  would,' his  thought said,  even as it 
fluttered away; and  it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost  gay 
it seemed to  be  casting off at last all doubt and care and  fear. And then 
even as  it  winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed 
to be crying in some forgotten world far above: 
     'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!' 
     For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered.  'Bilbo!'  it  said. 'But 

####-no! That came in his tale, long long  ago. This is my  tale, and it is ended 
now. Good-bye!' And his thought fled far away and his eyes saw no more. 
 
 

####- 

 
 

 * BOOK VI *  

Chapter 1. The Tower of Cirith Ungol 

 
 
     Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a  moment he wondered 
where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to him. He was in 
the deep dark outside the  under -gate of the orcs'  stronghold;  its  brazen 
doors were shut. He must have fallen  stunned when he hurled himself against  
them; but  how  long he had lain there he did not know. Then he  had been on 
fire, desperate and furious;  now he was shivering and cold. He crept to the 
doors and pressed his ears against them. 
     Far  within  he  could hear  faintly the voices of ores clamouring, but 
soon they stopped or  passed out of hearing,  and  all was still.  His  head 
ached and his eyes saw phantom lights in  the  darkness, but he struggled to 
steady  himself and  think. It  was clear at any rate that he had no hope of 
getting into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait  there for days before 
it was opened, and he could  not wait: time  was  desperately precious. He no 
longer had any doubt about his duty: he must rescue  his master or perish in 
the attempt. 
     'The  perishing is more  likely, and will be a lot  easier  anyway,' he 
said grimly to  himself,  as  he sheathed Sting and turned  from  the brazen 
doors. Slowly  he  groped his  way back in  the dark along  the  tunnel, not 
daring to  use the elven -light; and as  he went he tried to fit together the 
events since Frodo and he  had left  the  Cross-roads. He  wondered what the 
time  was. Somewhere between one day and the next, he supposed;  but even of 
the days he had  quite lost count. He  was in a  land  of darkness where the 
days of the world seemed forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten 
too. 
     'I wonder if they  think of us at all,' he said, 'and what is happening 
to them all away there.' He  waved his  hand vaguely  in the air before him; 
but  he  was  in fact now facing southwards,  as  he  came back to  Shelob's 
tunnel, not  west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the 
fourteenth day of  March in the  Shire-reckoning. And  even now  Aragorn was 
leading  the  black  fleet  from  Pelargir,  and  Merry was riding with  the 

####-Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in Minas Tirith flames were rising 
and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all 
their cares and  fear  the thoughts of  their friends  turned  constantly to 
Frodo and Sam. They were not forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no 
thought could yet  bring any help to Samwise  Hamfast's son; he was  utterly 
alone. 
 
     He came back at last to the  stone door of the  orc-passage, and  still 
unable to  discover the catch  or bolt that held it,  he scrambled  over  as 
before and dropped softly to  the ground. Then he made his way stealthily to 
the  outlet of Shelob's tunnel, where the rags  of  her great web were still 
blowing and swaying in the  cold airs. For cold they seemed to Sam after the  
noisome darkness behind;  but the  breath of  them  revived  him.  He  crept 
cautiously out. 
     All was ominously quiet.  The light was no more than that of dusk  at a  
dark day's end. The vast vapours that  arose in  Mordor and  went  streaming 
westward passed  low overhead,  a  great  welter of cloud and smoke now  lit 
again beneath with a sullen glow of red. 
     Sam  looked up  towards the orc-tower, and  suddenly  from  its  narrow 
windows lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if they were some 
signal.  His fear  of  the orcs,  forgot ten  for  a  while  in his wrath and 
desperation,  now returned. As  far  as he  could  see, there  was only  one 
possible course  for him to take: he  must go on  and try to find  the  main 
entrance to  the dreadful tower; but his knees  felt weak, and he  found that 
he was trembling. Drawing his eyes  down from the tower and the horns of the 
Cleft  before  him, he forced  his unwilling  feet  to obey him, and slowly, 
listening  with all  his  ears, peering into the dense shadows of  the rocks 
beside the way, he  retraced his steps, past the place where Frodo fell, and 
still the  stench of Shelob lingered,  and  then  on  and up, until he stood 
again in the very  cleft where  he had  put  on the Ring  and seen Shagrat's 
company go by. 
     There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive himself  no 
further. He  felt that if once he went beyond the crown of the pass and took  
one  step  veritably  down  into the land  of  Mordor, that  step  would  be 
irrevocable. He could never come back. Without a ny clear purpose he drew out 
the  Ring  and put it  on again. Immediately he felt the great burden of its 
weight, and  felt afresh,  but  now more  strong  and urgent than ever,  the 

####-malice of the Eye of Mordor, searching, trying to pierce the shadows that it 
had made for its own defence, but which now  hindered it in its  unquiet and 
doubt. 
     As before, Sam found  that his  hearing was sharpened, but  that to his 
sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky walls of the 
path were pale , as if seen through  a mist, but still at a distance he heard 
the bubbling of Shelob in her misery: and harsh and clear, and very close it 
seemed, he  heard cries  and the clash of metal. He sprang to his  feet, and 
pressed himself against the wall beside  the road. He was glad of the  Ring, 
for here was  yet another company of orcs on  the  march. Or so  at first he 
thought.  Then suddenly  he realized that  it  was not so,  his  hearing had 
deceived him: the orc-cries came from the tower, whose topmost  horn was 
now 
right above him, on the left hand of the Cleft. 
     Sam shuddered and tried  to force  himself to  move.  There was plainly 
some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all  orders  the  cruelty of  the 
orcs  had mastered them, and  they were tormenting Frodo,  or  even savagely 
hacking  him  to pieces. He listened; and as he did  a gleam of hope came to  
him. There could  not  be much  doubt: there was fighting in  the tower, the 
orcs  must be at war among themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to 
blows. 
Faint as was the  hope that his  guess brought him, it  was enough to  rouse 
him.  There might be just a  chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other  
thoughts, and forgetting his peril he cried aloud: 'I'm coming, Mr. Frodo!' 
     He ran  forward to  the  climbing path, and  over it.  At once the road 
turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor. 
 
     He took off  the  Ring, moved  it may be  by some  deep premonition  of 
danger,  though  to  himself he  thought  only that  he wished  to see  more 
clearly. `Better have a look at the worst,' he muttered. `No good blundering 
about in a fog!' 
     Hard and cruel and bitter  was the land  that met his gaze.  Before his 
feet the highest ridge  of the Ephel D®ath fell steeply in great cliffs down 
into a  dark trough, on the further side  of which there rose another ridge, 
much lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out 
black  against the red light  behind them: it was the grim Morgai, the inner  
ring of the fences  of  the land. Far  beyond it, but almost straight ahead, 

####-across a wide  lake  of darkness dotted  with  tiny fires, there was a great 
burning glow; and from it rose  in huge columns a swirling smoke,  dusty red 
at the  roots, black above  where it merged into the  billowing canopy  that 
roofed in all the accursed land. 
     Sam was looking  at Orodruin,  the Mountain of  Fire. Ever and anon the  
furnaces far  below  its ashen  cone would grow hot and with a great surging 
and  throbbing pour  forth rivers of  molten rock from chasms  in its sides.  
Some would  flow blazing towards  Barad-dyr down  great channels; some 
would 
wind their way into the  stony plain, until they cooled and lay like twisted 
dragon-shapes vomited from  the tormented earth .  In such an hour of  labour 
Sam beheld  Mount Doom, and the light  of it, cut off by the high  screen of 
the Ephel D®ath from those who climbed up the path from the West, now 
glared 
against the stark rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched with blood. 
     In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his  left, 
he could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The horn that he 
had  seen from the other side was only its topmost turret. Its  eastern face 
stood up  in three great tiers from a shelf in the mountain-wall far  below; 
its back was to a  great  cliff behind, from which it  jutted out in pointed 
bastions, one above the other, diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of 
cunning  masonry  that looked north-east  and   south-east. About the  lowest  
tier, two hundred feet below where Sam now  stood, there was a  battlemented 
wall  enclosing a narrow court.  Its gate, upon the near south-eastern side, 
opened  on a broad road,  the outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a  
precipice, until it turned southward and went winding down into the darkness 
to  join the road that came  over the Morgul Pass. Then on it went through a  
jagged  rift in the  Morgai  out  into the  valley of Gorgoroth  and away to 
Barad-dyr.  The  narrow upper way on which  Sam stood leapt  swiftly down 
by 
stair and steep path to meet the main road under the frowning walls close to  
the Tower -gate. 
     As he gazed at it  suddenly Sam understood, almost  with a shock,  that 
this stronghold had been  built  not to  keep enemies out of  Mordor, but to 
keep them in. It was indeed one  of the works of Gondor long ago, an eastern 
outpost of the defences of Ithilien, made when, after the Last Alliance, Men  
of  Westernesse kept  watch on  the evil land of  Sauron where his creatures 

####-still lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so 
here too the vigilance had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to  
the Lord of the Ringwraiths, and now for long years it had been held by evil  
things. Since his return to Mordor, Sauron had found  it useful; for he  had 
few servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief  purpose as of old 
was to prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy were so rash as to try 
to  enter that  land  secretly, then it  was also  a  last  unsleeping guard 
against any that might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob. 
     Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down 
under those many-eyed  walls and pass the watchful gate. And  even  if he did 
so, he  could not go  far  on  the guarded road beyond:  not even  the black  
shadows,  lying  deep where  the red glow could not reach, would shield  him 
long from the night-eyed orcs. But desperate as that road might be, his task  
was now  far worse: not to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone. 
 
     His  thought turned to the Ring, but there was  no  comfort there, only 
dread and danger. No  sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, burning 
far 
away, than he was aware of a cha nge in his burden. As it drew near the great 
furnaces  where,  in the deeps of time, it had been shaped  and forged,  the 
Ring's power grew, and  it became more fell, untameable  save by some mighty 
will. As Sam stood there, even though the Ring was not on  him but hanging by 
its chain about his neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a  
huge distorted shadow of  himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the 
walls of  Mordor. He  felt  that he had  from now on  only two  choices:  to 
forbear the Ring, though it would torment him; or to claim it, and challenge 
the Power that sat in  its dark hold beyond the valley  of  shadows. Already 
the Ring tempted him, gnawing at his will and  reason.  Wild fantasies arose 
in his mind; and he saw Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a 
flaming sword across the darkened land, and armies flocking  to  his call as 
he  marched to the  overthrow of  Barad-dyr. And then all the  clouds rolled 
away,  and the white sun  shone, and  at his command the  vale of  Gorgoroth 
became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit. He had only to 
put on the Ring and claim it for his own, and all this could be. 
     In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to 
hold  him firm; but also deep  down in him lived still unconquered his plain 
hobbit-sense: he  knew in the core of his heart that he was not large enough 

####-to bear such a burden, even  if such visions were not a mere cheat to betray 
him. The one small garden of a free gardener was all his need and due, not a  
garden swollen to a realm; his own hands to  use, not the hands of others to 
command. 
     'And  anyway all these notions  are only a trick,' he said  to himself. 
'He'd spot me and cow me, before I could so much as shou t out. He'd spot me, 
pretty  quick, if I put the Ring  on now, in Mordor. Well, all I can say is:  
things look  as hopeless  as  a frost in spring.  Just when being  invisible 
would be really useful, I can't use the Ring! And if ever I get any further, 
it's going to be nothing but a drag and a burden every step. So what's to be 
done?' 
     He was not  really  in any doubt. He knew  that he must go  down to the 
gate and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders,  as if to shake 
off the shadow and dismiss  the phantoms, he began  slowly  to descend. With 
each  step he seemed to  diminish. He had not gone far  before he had shrunk 
again to a  very small and  frightened hobbit. He was now  passing under the  
very walls of the Tower, and the cries and sounds of fighting could be heard 
with his unaided ears. At the moment the  noise seemed to be coming from the 
court behind the outer wall. 
 
     Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway  into 
the red  glow there  came two orcs running . They  did not turn towards  him. 
They were  making for the main road; but  even as they ran they stumbled and 
fell  to the ground  and lay still.  Sam had seen no  arrows, but he guessed 
that the orcs had  been shot down by others on  the battlements or hidden in 
the shadow of the gate. He  went on, hugging  the wall on his left. One look  
upward had  shown him that there was no hope of  climbing it. The stone-work 
rose  thirty  feet, without  a crack  or ledge, to  overhanging courses like 
inverted steps. The gate was the only way. 
     He crept on;  and  as he went  he wondered how many  orcs lived  in the 
Tower with Shagrat, and how many Gorbag had, and what they  were 
quarrelling 
about, if  that was  what was  happening. Shagrat's company had seemed to be 
about forty, and  Gorbag's more than twice as large; but of course Shagrat's 
patrol  had  only been a part of his  garrison. Almost  certainly  they were 
quarrelling  about  Frodo,  and the  spoil.  For  a second  Sam  halted, for 
suddenly things seemed clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with  his 

####-eyes. The mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find 
it. And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the orders of the 
Dark  Tower  were at present Frodo's  only  protection, and if they were set 
aside, Frodo might be killed out of hand at any moment. 
     'Come on, you miserable sluggard!' Sam cried to  himself. `Now for it!' 
He drew Sting and ran towards the  open gate. But  just as he was  about  to 
pass under its great arch he felt a  shock: as if  he had run into some  web 
like Shelob's, only invisible. He could see no obstacle,  but  something too 
strong for his will to  overcome barred  the way. He  looked about, and then  
within the shadow of the gate he saw the Two Watchers. 
     They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined 
bodies,  and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across the gateway. 
The  heads had vulture-faces, and on  their  great knees were  laid clawlike 
hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge blocks  of stone, immovable, and 
yet they were aware: some dreadful  spirit of evil vigilance  abode in them. 
They knew  an  enemy.  Visible or  invisible none  could pass unheeded. They 
would forbid his entry, or his escape. 
     Hardening his  will  Sam thrust forward once again, and  halted  with a  
jerk, staggering  as if from a blow  upon his  breast and head. Then greatly 
daring, because he could  think  of nothing  else to do, answering  a sudden 
thought that came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held 
it up.  Its white light quickened swiftly, and  the shadows under  the  dark 
arch fled. The monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still, revealed  in all 
their hideous shape. For a moment  Sam caught a  glitter in  the black stones  
of their  eyes, the very malice of which made  him quail; but slowly he felt 
their will waver and crumble into fear. 
     He sprang past them; but even as he  did so, thrusting the  phial  back  
into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to 
behind  him,  that their vigilance was  renewed. And  from  those evil heads 
there came  a high shrill cry that echoed  in the towering walls before him. 
Far up above,  like  an answering signal,  a  harsh bell  clanged  a  single 
stroke. 
 
     'That's done it!'  said Sam. `Now I've rung  the front-door bell! Well, 
come   on  somebody!'  he  cried.  `Tell  Captain  Shagrat  that  the  great 
Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!' 
     There  was no answer. Sam  strode forward. Sting glittered  blue in his 

####-hand. The courtyard lay in  deep shadow, but he could see that  the pavement 
was strewn with bodies. Right at his feet were  two  orc-archers with knives 
sticking  in their backs. Beyond lay many  more shapes;  some singly as they 
had been hewn  down or shot;  others in pairs, still  grappling one another, 
dead  in  the very  throes  of stabbing, throttling, biting. The stones were 
slippery with dark blood. 
     Two liveries Sam noticed, one  marked  by the  Red  Eye, the other by a  
Moon disfigured with a ghastly  face of death;  but he did not  stop to look  
more closely.  Across the court a  great door at the foot of the Tower stood 
half  open,  and a red light came through; a large  orc  lay dead  upon  the 
threshold. Sam sprang over the body and went in; and then he peered about at 
a loss. 
     A  wide  and  echoing  passage led  back  from  the  door  towards  the 
mountain-side. It  was  dimly  lit with torches flaring  in  brackets on the 
walls, but its distant end was lost in gloom. Many doors  and openings could 
be seen on this  side and  that; but it was empty save for two or three more 
bodies sprawling on the  floor. From what he had heard of the captains' talk  
Sam knew that, dead  or alive, Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber  
high up  in the turret far above; but he  might search for  a day  before he 
found the way. 
     'It'll  be near  the back, I  guess,' Sam  muttered.  `The  whole Tower  
climbs backwards-like. And anyway I'd better follow these lights.' 
     He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more reluctant. 
Terror  was beginning to grip him again. There was no sound save the  rap of 
his feet, which seemed to  grow to  an echoing noise,  like  the slapping of 
great hands upon  the stones. The dead bodies: the emptiness; the dank black 
walls  that in the torchlight seemed to drip with blood; the  fear of sudden 
death lurking in doorway or  shadow;  and behind all  his mind  the  waiting  
watchful malice at the gate: it  was almost more than he could  screw himself 
to  face. He would have welcomed a fight-with not too many enemies at a time 
- rather than this hideous brooding uncertainty. He forced himself to  think  
of Frodo,  lying bound or  in pain or dead somewhere in this dreadful place.  
He went on. 
     He had passed  beyond  the torchlight, almost to a great arched door at 
the end  of  the passage, the inner side of  the under gate, as  he  rightly 
guessed,  when  there  came  from high above a dreadful  choking shriek.  He 
stopped short. Then he heard feet coming. Someone was running in great haste 

####-down an echoing stairway overhead. 
     His  will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at the 
chain and  clutched  the Ring. But Sam did  not put  it  on; for even as  he 
clasped it to his breast, an orc came clattering down. Leaping out of a dark 
opening at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more than six paces from 
him  when,  lifting its head, it  saw him;  and  Sam  could hear its gasping 
breath and see the glare in its bloodshot eyes. It stopped short aghast. For  
what it saw was not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword:  
it saw a great silent shape, cloaked in  a grey shadow, looming against  the 
wavering light behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very  light of which 
was a bitter pain, the other was clutched  at its breast, but held concealed 
some nameless menace of power and doom. 
     For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp  of fear it 
turned and fled back as it had come. Never  was  any dog more heartened when 
its  enemy turned  tail  than Sam at this unexpected flight. With a shout he 
gave chase. 
     `Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!'  he  cried. 'I'm coming. Just you show 
me the way up, or I'll skin you! ' 
     But  the orc  was  in its own haunts,  nimble  and  well -fed. Sam was a  
stranger, hungry and weary.  The stairs  were  high  and  steep and winding.  
Sam's breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon passed  out  of sight,  
and now only faintly   could be  heard the slapping of its feet as it went on 
and  up. Every now  and again it gave  a yell, and  the  echo  ran along the 
walls. But slowly all sound of it died away. 
     Sam plodded on.  He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits 
had risen a  good  deal.  He thrust  the Ring away  and tightened his  belt. 
`Well, well!'  he said. `If only  they all take such a  dislike to me and my 
Sting, this  may  turn out  better than  I hoped. And anyway it looks  as if 
Shagrat, Gorbag, and company  have done nearly all my job for me. Except for  
that little frightened rat, I do believe  there's  nobody left alive  in the 
place!' 
     And with  that  he stopped, brought up  hard, as if he had hit his head 
against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struck him like 
a  blow. Nobody  left alive!  Whose had  been that  horrible  dying  shriek? 
`Frodo, Frodo! Master!' he cried half sobbing. 'If they've killed you,  what 
shall I do? Well, I'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.' 
 

####-     Up, up he went. It was dark save  for an occasional torch  flaring at a  
turn, or beside some opening  that  led into the higher levels of the Tower. 
Sam tried to count the  steps, but  after two hundred he lost his reckoning. 
He  was moving quietly  now: for  he thought that he could hear the sound of 
voices talking, still  some way above. More than  one rat remained alive, it 
seemed. 
     All  at  once, when he felt that he could pump out no more  breath, nor  
force  his knees to bend again, the stair ended. He stood still. The  voices 
were  now loud and near. Sam  peered about. He had climbed right to the flat 
roof of the third and highest tier of the Tower: an open space, about twenty 
yards across, with  a low parapet. There the  stair was covered by  a  small 
domed chamber in the midst of the roof, with low doors facing east and west. 
Eastward Sam  could  see the plain  of Mordor vast  and  dark below, and the 
burning mountain  far away. A  fresh turmoil was surging in its  deep wells,  
and the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many 
miles the light  of them  lit the tower -top with a red glare.  Westward  the 
view was blocked  by the base of the great turret that stood at the  back of 
this upper court and reared its  horn high above the crest of the encircling 
hills. Light gleamed in a window-slit. Its door was not ten yards from where 
Sam stood. It  was open but dark, and from just within its shadow the voices 
came. 
     At first Sam did not listen; he took a pace  out  of the  eastward door  
and  looked  about.  At  once he saw  that up  here the  fighting  had  been 
fiercest. All the  court was  choked with  dead orcs  or their  severed  and 
scattered heads  and limbs. The place stank of death. A snarl  followed by  a 
blow  and  a  cry  sent him darting back into hiding. An  orc-voice rose  in 
anger,  and he knew  it again  at once, harsh, brutal, cold. It was  Shagrat 
speaking, Captain of the Tower. 
     `You won't  go again,  you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot! If 
you think  I'm so damaged  that it's safe  to flout me, you're mistaken Come 
here, and I'll  squeeze  your  eyes out, like I did to Radbug just now.  And 
when some new lads come, I'll deal with you: I'll send you to Shelob.' 
     `They  won't  come,  not before  you're dead  anyway,'  answered  Snaga  
surlily. 'I've told you twice that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, and 
none of ours  got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through, but they were shot. I 
saw it from a window, I tell you. And they wer e the last.' 
     'Then you  must go. I must stay here anyway. But  I'm  hurt.  The Black  

####-Pits take  that filthy  rebel  Gorbag!' Shagrat's  voice trailed off into  a  
string of foul  names and curses. `I  gave  him  better  than  I got, but he 
knifed me, the dung,  before I throttled him. You must go, or  I'll eat you. 
News must  get through to Lugb®rz, or we'll both be for the Black Pits. Yes, 
you too. You won't escape by skulking here.' 
     `I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, `be you captain 
or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife,  or I'll  put  an arrow  in your 
guts. You won't be a captain  long when They hear about all these goings-on. 
I've  fought for the  Tower against those  stinking Morgul-rats,  but a nice 
mess you two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.' 
     'That's enough  from you,'  snarled  Shagrat. `I had my orders. It  was 
Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.' 
     `Well, you put  his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had  more 
sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of 
these spies was still loose, and you wouldn't  listen. And you  won't listen 
now. Gorbag  was right, I tell you. There's  a great fighter  about,  one of 
those bloody-handed  Elves, or one of the filthy tarks.1 He's coming here, I 
tell you. You heard the bell.  He's got past the Watchers, and that's tark's 
work.  He's on the stairs. And until he's off them, I'm not going  down. Not 
if you were a Nazgyl, I wouldn't.' 
     `So  that's it, is it?' yelled Shagrat. 'You'll do this, and you'll not 
do  that? And  when he does come, you'll bolt  and leave me? No, you  won't! 
I'll put red maggot-holes in your belly first.' 
     Out of the turret-door the  smaller  orc came flying.  Behind  him came 
Shagrat, a large orc with long  arms that,  as  he ran crouching, reached to 
the  ground. But one  arm hung  limp and seemed to be  bleeding;  the  other  
hugged  a  large black bundle.  In the red  glare  Sam, cowering behind  the 
stair-door, caught a glimpse of his evil face as it passed: it was scored as 
if  by  rending  claws and  smeared  with blood;  slaver  dripped  from  its 
protruding fangs; the mouth snarled like an animal. 
     As far as Sam could see, Shagrat  hunted  Snaga round  the roof,  until 
ducking and eluding  him the  smaller  orc with a yelp darted back  into the 
turret  and  disappeared. Then  Shagrat halted. Out of the eastward door Sam 
could see  him now  by the parapet, panting,  his  left claw  clenching  and 
unclenching feebly. He put  the bundle on the floor and with  his right claw 
drew out a long red knife and spat on it.  Going to  the  parapet he  leaned 
over, looking down into  the outer court far below.  Twice he shouted but no 

####-answer came. 
     Suddenly,  as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back to  the 
roof-top, Sam to  his amazement  saw  that one  of the  sprawling bodies was 
moving. It  was  crawling. It  put out  a  claw and clutched the  bundle. It 
staggered up. In its  other hand it  held a broad-headed spear  with a short 
broken haft. It was poised for a stabbing thrust. But at that  very moment a  
hiss  escaped  its teeth, a gasp of  pain or hate. Quick as a snake  Shagrat 
slipped aside, twisted round, and drove his knife into his enemy 's throat. 
     `Got you, Gorbag!' he cried. 'Not quite dead, eh? Well, I'll finish  my 
job now.' He sprang on to the  fallen  body, and stamped and trampled it  in 
his  fury, stooping  now and  again to  stab and  slash  it with his  knife. 
Satisfied  at last, he threw back  his head and let out a  horrible gurgling 
yell of triumph. Then he licked his knife, and put it between his teeth, and 
catching up the bundle he came loping towards the near door of the stairs.  
     Sam had no time  to think. He might have slipped out of the other door, 
but  hardly without  being seen;  and he could not have played hide-and-seek 
with this  hideous  orc for long. He did what was probably the best thing he 
could have  done.  He sprang  out to  meet  Shagrat with a shout. He was  no 
longer holding the Ring, but it was there, a hidden power, a  cowing  menace 
to the slaves of Mordor; and in his hand was Sting, and its  light smote the 
eyes  of  the   orc  like  the  glitter  of  cruel  stars  in  the  terrible 
elf-countries,  the  dream  of which was a  cold fear to all  his  kind.  And 
Shagrat could not  both fight and  keep hold  of his treasure.  He  stopped, 
growling, baring his fangs. Then once more, orc-fashion, he leapt aside, and 
as Sam  sprang at  him, using the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon, he 
thrust it  hard into his  enemy's face. Sam staggered, and before  he  could 
recover, Shagrat darted past and down the stairs.  
     Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far.  Soon the thought of 
Frodo returned  to him, and he remembered that the other  orc  had gone back 
into the turret. Here was another  dreadful  choice, and he  had  no time to 
ponder it. If Shagrat got away, he would soon get help and come back. But if 
Sam  pursued him,  the  other orc might  do some horrible deed up there. And 
anyway Sam might miss Shagrat or be killed by him. He turned quickly and ran 
back up the  stairs. `Wrong again, I expect,' he sighed. `But it's my job to 
go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.' 
     Away below Shagrat went leaping  down the stairs and out over the court 
and  through the gate,  bearing his precious burden. If Sam could have  seen 

####-him and known the grief that  his escape would bring, he might have quailed. 
But now his mind was set on the last stage of his search. He came cautiously  
to the turret-door and stepped inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his 
staring  eyes were aware of a dim light at  his right hand. It came  from an 
opening that led  to another stairway,  dark  and narrow: it appeared  to go 
winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A  torch was 
glimmering from somewhere up above. 
     Softly Sam began to climb. He came  to the guttering torch, fixed above 
a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward: one of the 
red eyes that he and Frodo  had  seen from down below by the tunnel's mouth. 
Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey, dreading at 
any  moment to he  attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize  his throat 
from behind. He came  next to a window looking east and another torch  above 
the door to a passage through the middle  of the turret. The door  was open, 
the passage  dark  save for the glimmer of  the torch and the red glare from 
outside filtering through  the window-slit.  But here  the stair stopped and 
climbed  no further. Sam crept into the passage.  On either side there was a  
low door; both were closed and locked. There was no sound at all. 
     `A dead end,'  muttered Sam; `and after all my climb! This can't be the  
top of the tower. But what can I do now?' 
     He ran back to the lower  storey and tried the door. It would not move. 
He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He felt that even 
minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped; and he could do nothing. 
He  cared  no  longer for Shagrat or Snaga  or any  other orc that  was ever 
spawned. He longed  only for his master,  for one  sight of his face  or one 
touch of his hand. 
     At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the 
level of the passage-floor and bowed his head into his hands. It  was quiet, 
horribly quiet.  The torch,  that was already burning  low  when he arrived, 
sputtered and went out; and he felt the darkness cover him like a tide.  And 
then softly, to his own  surprise, there at the vain end of his long journey 
and his  grief, moved by what thought in his  heart he could  not  tell, Sam 
began to sing. 
     His voice sounded thin and  quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice 
of a forlorn and  weary hobbit  that no listening orc could possibly mistake 
for the  clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured  old childish tunes out of 
the Shire, and snatches of Mr.  Bilbo's  rhymes that came into his mind like 

####-fleeting glimpses of the country of his home. And then suddenly new strength 
rose in him, and his voice rang out, while words of his own came unbidden to 
fit the simple tune. 
     In western lands beneath the Sun  
     the flowers may rise in Spring, 
     the trees may bud, the wa ters run, 
     the merry finches sing. 
     Or there maybe 'tis cloudless night 
     and swaying beeches bear 
     the Elven-stars as jewels white  
     amid their branching hair. 
 
     Though here at journey's end I lie  
     in darkness buried deep, 
     beyond all towers strong and high, 
     beyond all mountains steep, 
     above all shadows rides the Sun 
     and Stars for ever dwell: 
     I will not say the Day is done, 
     nor bid the Stars farewell. 
     `Beyond  all towers strong  and high,'  he began  again,  and  then  he 
stopped short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering him. But 
now he could  hear nothing. Yes, he  could hear something,  but not a voice.  
Footsteps were  approaching.  Now  a  door was being opened  quietly in  the 
passage above; the hinges  creaked. Sam crouched  down  listening.  The door  
closed with a dull thud; and then a snarling orc-voice rang out. 
     'Ho la! You up  there, you dunghill rat! Stop your  squeaking,  or I'll 
come and deal with you. D'you hear?' 
     There was no answer. 
     'All right,' growled Snaga.  `But I'll come and  have a look at you all 
the same, and see what you're up to.' 
     The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now  peering over  the corner of the 
passage-threshold, saw a flicker  of light in an open doorway, and  the  dim 
shape of an orc  coming out. He seemed to be carrying a ladder. Suddenly the 
answer dawned on Sam: the topmost chamber was reached  by a trap-door in 
the 
roof of the passage. Snaga thrust the ladder  upwards, steadied it, and then 

####-clambered  out  of  sight. Sam heard  a bolt drawn back.  Then he  heard the 
hideous voice speaking again. 
     `You  lie quiet, or  you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live  in 
peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, keep  your 
trap shut, see? There's a reminder  for you!'  There was  a sound  like  the 
crack of a whip. 
     At that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran, 
and went up  the ladder  like a cat. His head came out in the middle of  the 
floor of a large  round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof; the westward 
window-slit was high and dark. Something  was lying on the floor by the wall 
under the window,  but over it a black  orc-shape was straddled. It raised a  
whip a second time, but the blow never fell. 
     With a cry Sam  leapt across  the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled 
round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed  its  whip-hand  from its 
arm.  Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head-down  at 
him.  Sam's  next  blow  went wide,  and  thrown  off  his balance  he  fell 
backwards, clutching at  the  orc as it  stumbled over him.  Before he could 
scramble up he heard a cry and a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped 
on the ladder -head  and  fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more 
thought to it. He ran to the figure huddled on the floor. It was Frodo. 
 
     He was  naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags: his arm 
was  flung up,  shielding his head,  and  across his side there ran an  ugly 
whip-weal. 
     `Frodo! Mr. Frodo,  my dear!'  cried Sam,  tears  almost  blinding him. 
`It's Sam, I've come!' He  half  lifted  his  master and hugged  him to  his 
breast. Frodo opened his eyes. 
     `Am  I  still  dreaming?'  he  muttered.  `But  the other  dreams  were 
horrible.' 
     `You're not dreaming at all, Master,'  said  Sam. `It's real. It's  me. 
I've come.' 
     `I can hardly believe it,' said Frodo, clutching him. `There was an orc 
with a whip, and then  it  turns into Sam! Then I wasn't  dreaming after all 
when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?' 
     'It was indeed, Mr.  Frodo. I'd given up  hope, almost. I couldn't find 
you. 
     Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he la back  in Sam's 

####-gentle arms,  closing his eyes, like  a child at rest  when night-fears  are 
driven away by some loved voice or hand. 
     Sam  felt that he  could sit like that in endless happiness; but it was 
not allowed. It was not  enough for him to find his master, he  had still to 
try and save him. He kissed Frodo's forehead. `Come!  Wake up Mr. Frodo!' he 
said, trying to sound as cheerful  as he had when  he drew back the curtains 
at Bag End on a summer's morning. 
     Frodo sighed and sat up. `Where are we? How did I get here?' he asked. 
     'There's no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo,' said 
Sam. `But you're in the top of that tower you and me saw from away  down  by 
the tunnel before the orcs got you. How long ago that wa s I don't know. More 
than a day, I guess.' 
     `Only that?' said  Frodo. `It seems weeks. You  must  tell me all about 
it,  if  we get  a  chance. Something  hit me, didn't  it?  And I fell  into 
darkness and foul dreams,  and  woke and found that  waking was worse.  Orcs 
were all round me. I think they had just been  pouring some horrible burning  
drink  down my throat. My head grew clear, but I was  aching and weary. They 
stripped me of everything; and then two great brutes came and questioned me, 
questioned  me until I thought I should go mad, standing  over me, gloating,  
fingering their knives. I'll never forget their claws and eyes.' 
     `You won't,  if you talk about them, Mr.  Frodo,' said Sam.  'And if we 
don't want to see them  again, the sooner we   get going  the better. Can you  
walk?' 
     `Yes,  I can walk,' said Frodo, getting up slowly. 'I am not hurt  Sam. 
Only  I feel very tired, and I've a pain here.' He put  his hand to the back  
of his neck above his left shoulder. He stood up, and it looked to Sam as if 
he was clothed in flame: his naked skin was scarlet in the light of the lamp 
above. Twice he paced across the floor. 
     `That's better!' he said,  his spirits rising a  little. `I didn't dare 
to move when I was left alone, or  one of the guards came. Until the yelling 
and fighting began. The two big  brutes:  they quarrelled, I think. Over  me 
and my  things. I lay  here  terrified. And then all  went deadly quiet, and 
that was worse.' 
     `Yes, they  quarrelled, seemingly,'  said Sam. (There must  have been a  
couple  of  hundred of the dirty creatures  in  this place.  A bit of a tall 
order for Sam Gamgee, as  you might say. But they've done all the killing of 
themselves. That's lucky, but it's too long to make a song about, till we're 

####-out of  here. Now what's to be done? You can't go walking  in the Black Land 
in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.' 
     `They've  taken everything, Sam,' said Frodo. `Everything I had. Do you  
understand?  Everything!'  He cowered on the floor again with bowed head, as 
his own words brought home to  him the fullness of the disaster, and despair  
overwhelmed him.  'The quest  has failed Sam. Even if we get out of here, we 
can't escape. Only  Elves  can escape. Away,  away out  of Middle-earth, far  
away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.' 
     `No,  not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it  hasn't failed, not yet. I took  
it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon.  And I've kept  it safe.  It's round  my 
neck  now, and a terrible  burden it is, too.'  Sam fumbled for the Ring and 
its chain. `But I suppose you must take it back.' Now it had come to it, Sam 
felt reluctant to give up the Ring and burden his master with it again. 
     `You've  got it?' gasped  Frodo. `You've  got  it  here? Sam, you're  a  
marvel!'  Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. `Give it to  me!'  he 
cried, standing up, holding out  a trembling hand. `Give it  me at once! You  
can't have it!' 
     'All right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rather startled. 'Here it is!' Slowly 
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head.  `But you're in the 
land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you'll see the Fiery Mountain 
and all. You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to bear.  If 
it's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?' 
     `No, no!'  cried Frodo, snatching the  Ring and chain from Sam's hands.  
`No you won't,  you thief!'  He panted, staring at Sam  with eyes wide  with 
fear and enmity. Then  suddenly, clasping the Ring in one clenched  fist, he 
stood aghast. A mist seemed  to  clear from his eyes, and  he passed a  hand 
over  his  aching brow. The hideous vision had  seemed so real to  him, half 
bemused as he was still with wound and fear. Sam had changed before his very 
eyes  into an orc again, leering and pawing  at his  treasure, a foul little 
creature with  greedy  eyes  and  slobbering  mouth. But  now the vision had 
passed.  There was Sam kneeling before him, his face wrung with pain,  as if 
he had been stabbed in the heart; tears welled from his eyes. 
     'O Sam!' cried Frodo. `What have I said? What have I done? Forgive  me! 
After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the Ring. I wish it had 
never, never, been found. But don't mind me, Sam. I must carry the burden to 
the end. It can't be altered. You can't come between me and this doom.' 
     'That's all right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rubbing  his sleeve across his 

####-eyes. `I understand. But I can still help, can't I? I've got to get  you out 
of  here. At  once, see! But first you want  some clothes  and gear and then 
some food.  The clothes will be the  easiest part. As we're in Mordor, we'd, 
best  dress up Mordor -fashion;  and anyway there isn't no choice. It'll have 
to  be orc-stuff  for you, Mr.  Frodo,  I'm afraid. And for me too. If we go 
together, we'd best match. Now put this round you!' 
     Sam unclasped his grey cloak and cast it about Frodo's  shoulders. Then 
unslinging his pack he laid  it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath. 
Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon  its blade. `I was forgetting this, Mr. 
Frodo,' he said.  `No, they didn't get everything! You lent me Sting, if you  
remember, and the Lady's glass. I've  got them both still. But  lend them to 
me a little longer, Mr. Frodo. I must go  and see what  I can find. You stay 
here. Walk about a bit and ease your legs. I shan't be long.  I shan't  have 
to go far.' 
     `Take  care,  Sam!'  said Frodo. `And be quick! There may be orcs still 
alive, lurking in wait.' 
     'I've  got to chance  it,' said  Sam. He  stepped to the  trap-door and 
slipped down the ladder. In a  minute  his head reappeared. He threw  a long 
knife on the floor. 
     `There's something that might be  useful,' he said. 'He's dead: the one 
that  whipped  you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his hurry. Now you draw  up 
the ladder, if  you can, Mr. Frodo;  and don't you let it down till you hear 
me call the password. Elbereth   I'll call. What  the Elves say. No orc would 
say that.' 
 
     Frodo sat  for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one another 
through his mind. Then he  got up, drew the grey elven-cloak about him,  and 
to keep his mind occupied, began to walk to and fro, prying and peering into 
every corner of his prison. 
     It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least, before 
he  heard Sam's voice calling softly from  below:  Elbereth, Elbereth . Frodo 
let  down the light ladder. Up  came Sam, puffing, heaving a great bundle on  
his head. He let it fall with a thud. 
     `Quick now. Mr.  Frodo!' he said. `I've had a  bit of  a search to find 
anything  small enough for the likes of us.  We'll have  to make do.  But we 
must hurry. I've met nothing alive, and  I've seen nothing but I'm not easy. 
I think this place is being watched. I can't explain it, but well: it  feels 

####-to me as  if  one of those foul flying Riders was about, up in the blackness 
where he can't be seen.' 
     He opened  the  bundle. Frodo  looked in  disgust at  the contents, but 
there was nothing for it: he had to put the  things on, or go  naked.  There 
were  long hairy breeches of some unclean beast -fell,  and a  tunic of dirty 
leather. He  drew them on. Over the  tunic  went a coat  of stout ring-mail, 
short for  a  full-sized  orc,  too long for  Frodo  and heavy. About it  he 
clasped  a belt, at which there hung a  short  sheath holding a broad-bladed 
stabbing-sword.  Sam  had brought  several  orc-helmets. One of  them fitted  
Frodo well enough, a black  cap with iron rim, and  iron  hoops covered with 
leather  upon  which  the  evil  Eye was  painted  in red above the beaklike 
nose-guard. 
     `The Morgul-stuff,  Gorbag's gear,  was  a better fit and better made,' 
said Sam;  `but it  wouldn't do,  I  guess, to go  carrying his  tokens into 
Mordor,  not  after  this  business here. Well,  there you are, Mr. Frodo. A 
perfect little orc, if I may make so bold-at least you would be, if we could 
cover your face with a mask,  give you longer arms, and make you bow-legged. 
This  will  hide some of the tell-tales.' He put a large  black cloak  round 
Frodo's shoulders. `Now you're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.' 
     'What about you, Sam?' said Frodo. `Aren't we going to match?' 
     `Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been  thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best  not  leave 
any of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it.  And  I can't wear orc-mail 
over all my clothes, can I? I'll just have to cover up.' 
     He knelt  down  and  carefully  folded his elven-cloak. It went  into a  
surprisingly small roll. This  he  put into his pack  that lay on the floor. 
Standing up, he slung  it behind his back,  put an orc-helm on  his head, and 
cast another  black cloak about  his  shoulders. `There!' he  said. `Now  we 
match, near enough. And now we must be off!' 
     'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile. 'I  
hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or  have you forgotten 
about food and drink?' 
     `Save me,  but so  I had!' said Sam.  He whistled in dismay. 'Bless me, 
Mr. Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I don't know 
when   drop or  morsel last passed my lips. I'd forgotten it,  trying to find 
you.  But let  me  think!  Last time I looked  I'd got about enough of  that 
waybread, and of  what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep  me on my legs for a  
couple of weeks at a pinch. But if there's a drop left in my bottle, there's 

####-no more. That's  not going to be enough for two, nohow. Don't ores eat,  and 
don't they drink? Or do they just live on foul air and poison?' 
     `No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that  bred them can only mock, 
it cannot make:  not real new things of its own. I  don't think it gave life 
to the ores, it only  ruined them and twisted them; and if they are  to live 
at all, they have to live like  other living creatures. Foul waters and foul 
meats  they'll  take, if they can get no better, but not poison. They've fed 
me, and so I'm better off than you. There must be food and  water  somewhere 
in this place.' `But there's no time to look for them,' said Sam. 
     `Well, things are a bit better than you think,' said Frodo. 'I have had 
a bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take everything. I've 
found my food-bag among some  rags  on  the  floor.  They've rummaged it, of 
course. But I  guess  they disliked  the very look and smell of  the lembas, 
worse than Gollum did. It's scattered about  and some  of it is trampled and 
broken,  but I've gathered  it  together. It's not far short of  what you've 
got.   But  they've   taken  Faramir's  food,  and  they've  slashed  up  my 
water -bottle.' 
     `Well,  there's no more  to  be said,' said  Sam. `We've got enough  to 
start  on.  But the water's going to be a  bad business. But come Mr. Frodo!  
Off we go, or a whole lake of it won't do us any good!' 
     'Not  till you've  had  a mouthful,  Sam,' said Frodo. `I won't  budge. 
Here, take this elven-cake, and  drink that last drop in  your  bottle!  The 
whole thing is quite hopeless, so it's no good worrying  about  tomorrow. It 
probably won't come.' 
 
     At last they started. Down the ladder  they climbed, and then Sam  took  
it and laid it in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen orc. The 
stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare of the Mountain could still be 
seen, though it  was dying down  now to  a  sullen red.  They  picked up two 
shields to complete their disguise and then went on. 
     Down  the great stairway they plodded. The  high chamber of the  turret 
behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely: they were out in the 
open again  now,  and terror ran along  the walls. All might be  dead in the 
Tower of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped in fear and evil still. 
     At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they  halted. 
Even  from where they stood they felt the malice  of the Watchers beating on 
them, black silent shapes on either side of the gate through which the glare 

####-of Mordor dimly showed. As they threaded their way among the hideous  
bodies 
of the  ores each step became more  difficult. Before they  even reached the 
archway they were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and 
weariness to will and limb. 
     Frodo  had no  strength  for such a  battle. He sank  to the ground. `I  
can't go  on, Sam,' he  murmured. `I'm  going  to faint. I don't know what's 
come over me.' 
     `I  do, Mr.  Frodo. Hold up  now! It's  the gate.  There's some devilry 
there. But  I got  through,  and  I'm going to  get  out.  It can't be  more 
dangerous than before. Now for it!' 
     Sam drew  out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honour to 
his hardihood, and to grace with  splendour  his faithful  brown hobbit-hand  
that had done such  deeds, the  phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the 
shadowy  court  was  lit with  a  dazzling  radiance  like lightning; but it 
remained steady and did not pass.  
     'Gilthoniel, A  Elbereth!' Sam  cried. For, why he  did  not know,  his 
thought sprang back suddenly to  the Elves in the Shire,  and the song  that 
drove away the Black Rider in the trees.  
     'Aiya elenion ancalima!' cried Frodo once again behind him. 
     The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping  
of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled  forward. Then they  ran.  Through the 
gate and past the great seated figures with their glittering eyes. There was 
a crack.  The keystone of the  arch  crashed almost on  their heels, and the 
wall  above crumbled, and fell in ruin. Only  by a  hair did  they escape. A 
bell clanged; and from the Watchers there went up  a high and dreadful wail.  
Far  up above in  the darkness it was answered . Out of the  black  sky there 
came dropping like a bolt a winged shape, rending the clouds with  a ghastly  
shriek. 
 
